[Amit Varma]: One of my favorite poems is a miniature masterpiece that goes like this.
[Amit Varma]: Separation, by W.S.
[Amit Varma]: Mervyn.
[Amit Varma]: Your absence has gone through me like thread through a needle.
[Amit Varma]: Everything I do is stitched with its color.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: While recording the episode you're going to hear now, it struck me that Mervyn's evocative
[Amit Varma]: poem is not just true of personal relationships.
[Amit Varma]: Relationships and societies can be haunted by the past in quite the same way.
[Amit Varma]: Indeed, you can look at the world through the prism of the seen and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: All the events that happen around you are what is seen, but the many layers of history
[Amit Varma]: that have led to them and that affect all our actions are unseen.
[Amit Varma]: This is true, especially for India, a complex country with complex histories.
[Amit Varma]: In a sense, everything that happens here is stitched with the color of the past.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things that I have realized about India's partition is that it was not
[Amit Varma]: just an event that unfolded over a couple of weeks or a couple of months or even a couple
[Amit Varma]: of years.
[Amit Varma]: Instead, it lives on today and its consequences are all around us.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is Aanchal Malhotra, an artist, historian and writer.
[Amit Varma]: A few years ago, Aanchal set out on a project to document oral histories of partition using
[Amit Varma]: the catalyst of physical objects that people carried with them on their trips from one
[Amit Varma]: side of the border to another.
[Amit Varma]: Simply put, she would meet survivors of partition, get them to show objects from their past life,
[Amit Varma]: and through that, open up this deep well of experiences and memories.
[Amit Varma]: This came together in a remarkable and deeply moving book called Remnants of a Separation,
[Amit Varma]: published in the rest of the world as Remnants of Partition.
[Amit Varma]: Aanchal is also the co-founder of the Museum of Material Memory, which she describes as
[Amit Varma]: quote, a digital repository of material culture of the Indian subcontinent, tracing family
[Amit Varma]: histories and social ethnography through heirlooms, collectibles and objects of antiquity.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: I found this entire project so fascinating and even heartbreaking because while so much
[Amit Varma]: history can seem abstract, she made it concrete by giving us intimate details of personal
[Amit Varma]: stories, which added so much depth to my understanding of the horror of those times and also of human
[Amit Varma]: nature and the human condition.
[Amit Varma]: When the lives of others come alive for us, then our own lives are enriched.
[Amit Varma]: I learned a lot from this conversation with Aanchal, but before we get to that, let's
[Amit Varma]: take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: That's it for
[Amit Varma]: the travel and so on. So well, I'm trying a new way of keeping this thing going and that involves you.
[Amit Varma]: My proposition for you is this, for every episode of the seen and the unseen that you enjoy,
[Amit Varma]: buy me a cup of coffee or even a lavish lunch, whatever you feel it's worth.
[Amit Varma]: You can do this by heading over to seen unseen dot I n slash support and
[Amit Varma]: contributing an amount of your choice.
[Amit Varma]: This is not a subscription. The seen and the unseen will continue to be free on all podcast apps and
[Amit Varma]: at seen unseen dot I n. This is just a gesture of appreciation.
[Amit Varma]: Help keep this thing going. Seen unseen dot I n slash support.
[Guest]: Anshul, welcome to the seen and the unseen. Thank you. It's a pleasure to be here, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: Anshul, the shoe is really on the other foot now because instead of you asking other people about their past,
[Amit Varma]: I'm going to start asking you about your past. So tell me a little bit about
[Amit Varma]: yourself and how you came to doing what you're doing, you know, being a chronicler of memory as it were, a historian of sorts.
[Amit Varma]: How did all this sort of, what are the different strands in your life which brought you here?
[Guest]: Well, I started any form of career that I had by being an artist.
[Guest]: And I don't know how many people know this, but I trained to be a traditional printmaker,
[Guest]: more specifically a metal engraver. So for, I guess, from the age of 17 to 26 or so, I worked in a print shop and
[Guest]: worked with copper plates and acid.
[Guest]: And I really thought that that was, that was the direction that my life was going to remain in.
[Guest]: Because ever since I've been young, I've been, I've only been fond of the arts and I have been lucky enough to have a family that supports that.
[Guest]: So I did my BFA in traditional print and art history, then I did my MFA in printmaking, and I really thought that it would lead to a career in
[Guest]: what is basically a master printer.
[Guest]: And I think also the craft of printmaking is such an obsolete craft that what I loved about it is that I was associating myself to a kind of
[Guest]: almost forgotten history, whether it is, you know, printing on a printing press or setting handset type.
[Guest]: And that was lovely. That was really lovely. But I do realize that it has its limitations in the digital age.
[Guest]: And in that sense, I kind of fell into history almost accidentally, because I was working on my
[Guest]: master's thesis in Montreal at the moment. This is around 2012-2013. And what happens in a fine art
[Guest]: program is that you can essentially work on any subject you want for your research, as long as you
[Guest]: produce a body of work, physical work that can be hung in a gallery, and that you will defend.
[Guest]: So like most people defend papers during their thesis, people like me would defend a body of artwork.
[Guest]: And for this, I don't know how I got really interested. Well, I know how I got really
[Guest]: interested in the partition of India. I was in my grad program for two years, and the third year was
[Guest]: supposed to be the thesis year. And I remember taking a sabbatical year off, because I just
[Guest]: didn't have any ideas for my thesis. And I think the thing with any creative practice is that the
[Guest]: more you push it, the more it's visible that you've pushed it. And it doesn't seem natural.
[Guest]: It doesn't seem like it's coming from within. So I took a gap year. I moved home, back to India
[Guest]: from Canada. And I said, okay, if the idea needs to come, it's going to come naturally. And I remember
[Guest]: it was 2013, October. And I have a friend, my aunt Austin Sufi, who's more popularly known as the
[Guest]: Delhiwala. And he and I went to my grandfather's house in North Delhi, because my aunt was writing
[Guest]: a story about old houses in the city at that time. And he asked us questions, of course, about the
[Guest]: house that my grandfather lived in, which was built in the 50s. And I, that day, started seeing the
[Guest]: house through a very different lens. Added to this fact was my grandfather's elder brother, who
[Guest]: brought up all these old objects. And a lot of those objects had been carried from across the
[Guest]: border before partition. And two objects specifically that had been carried by his parents to Delhi,
[Guest]: they came from Lahore to Amritsar, and finally to Delhi. And these were very, very mundane
[Guest]: home-based objects, a ghara, in which lassi is made, a metal vessel, and a ghaz, a yardstick,
[Guest]: which was used in the clothing store to measure fabric. It's called a ghaz. And I think that when
[Guest]: my grandfather's brother started talking about these two objects, it was so visceral, because he
[Guest]: was transported back to his childhood in Lahore. And it was not just the fact that he was transported
[Guest]: to the past, which happens quite commonly with, you know, aged artifacts, but also the fact that
[Guest]: he was transported across this really impenetrable border, almost seamlessly in front of me. And I
[Guest]: don't think anyone else noticed that happening, but I became obsessed with the idea that the object
[Guest]: can transport us somewhere. And of course, you know, objects do this, old objects, when we hold
[Guest]: them, they remind us of other times, they remind us of other people. But that idea of being transported
[Guest]: across a border by an object was so powerful for me. And I think in that moment, I realized that I
[Guest]: found my MFA thesis idea. So I spent the next year, I would say traveling around India, interviewing
[Guest]: people about objects. And I'm sure we'll go more into the interview process later. So I'm just
[Guest]: going to tell you a very brief overview. And when I went back to Canada, after my one year
[Guest]: sabbatical was when I started really working on using historical images, which is a very
[Guest]: important thing that I'm working on, using historical information to create artwork that I would
[Guest]: finally showcase in a gallery and defend at some point.
[Amit Varma]: Right. So, you know, my sort of interface with this project is, of course, a book, you know, when it
[Amit Varma]: originated, were you thinking of it as sort of artwork? Were you thinking of it as, you know,
[Amit Varma]: it'll come together as a book? Were you merely simply at that point, not thinking of form so
[Amit Varma]: much, but just fascinated by the process of, you know, excavating memory through talking about
[Amit Varma]: things as it were, and then letting that lead where it will? What was your thought process that
[Amit Varma]: led you through this entire project?
[Guest]: I don't think I ever thought of it as a book at the beginning. And to be honest, I don't think
[Guest]: I thought of it as a book until 2016, as late as 2016. And I have been raised in a family that
[Guest]: owns a bookshop. So books are very intrinsic to me. And despite that, I never did anything in it.
[Guest]: That it was always about the visual for me, because I was interested in art, I was good at art.
[Guest]: And then I went to college for art as well. So I think when I started on the idea, it was very
[Guest]: much about the physicality of the object, the emotions attached to the object. How can I portray
[Guest]: something in a photograph that transports someone to that moment? Right. But what I was also doing,
[Guest]: and for this, I guess I have great hindsight, you know, I have great foresight, is that I was
[Guest]: interviewing people about the object. So everything that would essentially be included in an oral
[Guest]: history interview was happening anyway, because I was curious about the object, which meant that
[Guest]: when eventually I did realize that I wanted to make this into a book, I had a lot of subject
[Guest]: matter ready available for me. But at the beginning, it was really just about the thesis and
[Guest]: making something visual and making something. I think also because I was I was living in Canada,
[Guest]: and people over there really did not know enough about South Asian history. So it also became a
[Guest]: way to make people more aware of diverse histories. But the book was never really on the cards at the
[Amit Varma]: beginning. And how does the expected audience of a work play a part in shaping the work itself?
[Amit Varma]: For example, I've often found that, you know, a decade ago, I used to write for foreign papers,
[Amit Varma]: like the Wall Street Journal, The Guardian, and so on. And I eventually stopped because I hated it,
[Amit Varma]: because I found that a lot of shared knowledge that one takes for granted when one writes for
[Amit Varma]: an Indian audience, you know, you can't take that for granted. And you have to dump everything down.
[Amit Varma]: And you have to, you know, explain even the simplest thing. And the thing is that for an
[Amit Varma]: Indian reader of your book, knowing what I know about the partition, even my dad, you know,
[Amit Varma]: went from Lahore to Calcutta, though, that was not at the partition, but well before.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, there's a certain shared knowledge and empathy that you can take for granted,
[Amit Varma]: which is not so with the foreign reader, does that then sort of shape the art that you're
[Amit Varma]: producing that a certain amount of the space goes into explanatory stuff, just giving the background,
[Amit Varma]: whereas, you know, for a different audience, perhaps you'd have less of that and
[Amit Varma]: more of just, you know, evoking the time and the emotions and all of that.
[Guest]: Well, I mean, I think there's a two part answer to that. The first is that visual art can transcend
[Guest]: language, which means that it can transcend specific histories, right? When you're looking
[Guest]: at a painting or a photograph, or even a film, you may not have to be born in that specific
[Guest]: geographic area to feel something that it's trying to make you feel. So that's, that's one
[Guest]: of the, it's one of the positive aspects about art. And obviously art has many positive aspects,
[Guest]: but I didn't really feel like the images had to be explained. What I felt was that the history
[Guest]: behind the images had to be explained, which is actually what also started getting me towards
[Guest]: the book, that there was so much that an image could not give to someone that words had to be
[Guest]: put. But the other thing, the second part about that answer is, is a sense of emotion. What you're
[Guest]: trying to do is not to put together a conventional history of partition, but a human history of
[Guest]: partition. And I think when it comes to feelings of migration, displacement, loss, particularly
[Guest]: in the country where I was living, Canada, which is largely for my immigrants, I think there was
[Guest]: a lot of resonance. And the larger teams had a lot of resonance, the specificity may have been lost,
[Guest]: but the larger themes about leaving a place, either by choice or by force, could be felt by
[Amit Varma]: many people. How did you sort of then begin, like to speak about the interviewing itself, and
[Amit Varma]: we briefly spoke about it before we started recording, where you reminded me that you're
[Amit Varma]: a professional interviewer, and therefore out of great curiosity and hoping that I can learn
[Amit Varma]: something from this, how did you approach that process? Because I of course, you know, I sort of
[Amit Varma]: have willing participants, when I talk to people on my show, they know what I'm doing. There's that
[Amit Varma]: common ground, it's not that difficult, though one does have, you know, little things one does to
[Amit Varma]: make them comfortable, and so on. But in your case, you're speaking to people who are literally
[Amit Varma]: decades older than you. And what is even harder is that many of the things you want them to talk
[Amit Varma]: about, they could include things that they've suppressed for years and years. So your task is
[Amit Varma]: first to make them comfortable, and then to make them open up and to make them take you seriously.
[Amit Varma]: So what was that process of learning how to have these conversations? And what tips can you share
[Guest]: for other would-be conversationalists? I think learning is the key word here, because I'm still
[Guest]: very much learning how to do it. And I think like, working with people is, you know, gives you a
[Guest]: sense of great humility, because you're constantly learning. I started this work when I was 23 years
[Guest]: old, which meant 2013. 23 is a very young age to do anything of this serious nature. And at the
[Guest]: beginning, as you would expect, I had a lot of issues. Because I don't know why at that point,
[Guest]: I thought it would be a great idea not to do any secondary research at the beginning. So to really
[Guest]: go in straight, fresh, fill my head with personal knowledge about people, and then later do my
[Guest]: secondary research, which in hindsight was not a great idea, because I didn't really know what I
[Guest]: was getting into. But I have since thought about the interview process a lot. And I can maybe
[Guest]: start at the beginning as to what I felt at the beginning. So in those first few interviews in
[Guest]: 2013, I found it very difficult to start asking questions, because the thing is,
[Guest]: you're right, you're not asking about how was your day, tell me about your kitty party.
[Guest]: Let's talk about this the bola thing you played. No, it's actually tell me when you left your home
[Guest]: and tell me how it felt. And tell me whether you were scared. What did you do? And these are really
[Guest]: how to start saying these things. How do you reach common ground. And so I have something which I
[Guest]: unofficially called the plateau method, which is, if you want someone to reach here, up here,
[Guest]: then you have to make it your responsibility to also reach here, which means that if someone would
[Guest]: be saying something of great vulnerability, I'm not saying that you have to say equally the same
[Guest]: amount of vulnerable things, but you have to give yourself to the person as well, which means
[Guest]: you have to be a couple of things, honest, sincere, and genuinely interested in what they're saying.
[Guest]: I think the largest issue with being a millennial is that I had to learn how to listen to people,
[Guest]: right, which is a really underrated, underrated habit, listening. And I think when you're an older
[Guest]: auto historian, and you're working with older people, that is key to listen to them, because
[Guest]: you can go in with a structured interview, which by the way, is something I never do.
[Guest]: And you can ask all the questions and they can answer all the questions, but you still may not
[Guest]: get anything of significance from them. The point is to listen to what they're saying and ask follow
[Guest]: up questions based on what they have said. And these could be really mundane questions, like
[Guest]: tell me how you made your hair. Did you wear a braid? Or did you wear a ponytail when you were
[Guest]: young? Or tell me what you wore? Because I realized very, very early on that to talk about partition
[Guest]: is very difficult still, which means that there is something so extraordinary about the 1947
[Guest]: partition that we haven't been able to let go of its heaviness. And part of that is because
[Guest]: we haven't talked about its heaviness. So if something remains suppressed for years, then
[Guest]: it's almost as if every conversation is starting at the beginning of unravelling something about,
[Guest]: right. And so, in that sense, because my study was about objects, it made it a little bit easier,
[Guest]: actually, because I could say, okay, tell me about this pen. Why did you carry this pen? How did you
[Guest]: carry this pen? Oh, your father gave you this pen, okay, it was very expensive at the time.
[Guest]: And then how did you know that you had to carry things? How did you learn about partition? You
[Guest]: heard it on the radio? Okay, what radio did you listen to? What newspaper did you get in your home?
[Guest]: So what I was trying to do was not only archive memory about partition, because that's a limited
[Guest]: event. What I was trying to do is to archive the social ethnography of life before partition in an
[Guest]: undivided India and how it was fractured because of partition. For that, we need to furnish people's
[Guest]: lives with details. And I think that we have this great misconception that partition happened
[Guest]: in August 1947. And that's the month of mayhem. And that's it. But in fact, it started much before
[Guest]: that. And it took many months, even years to normalize. Some would argue that the repercussions
[Guest]: still haven't normalized per se, even now. But I think that in asking questions only about the
[Guest]: violence or the trauma or migration of displacement, you already limit your interview to that lens.
[Guest]: And there is a great injustice in that because then you only paint the event of partition as an
[Guest]: event of trauma. Whereas there were moments of great sacrifice and friendship and camaraderie
[Guest]: that came from that event that were born because of the circumstances of partition and you lose
[Guest]: out on the opportunity with the cultures. So one of the things that I did was to be completely
[Guest]: open in my interviewing process, which leads you to a lot of tangential stories, particularly with
[Guest]: old people, because they talk a lot because someone is listening. And that's really what
[Guest]: they want for someone to listen. So we would be talking about a bomb blast at the time,
[Guest]: then we would suddenly go to the school they went to. Then from there, we would go to the stones
[Guest]: they would collect as a child and a paper book they made. And it was just really all over the
[Guest]: place, which also tells you that memory is not chronological and it does not work in a linear
[Guest]: fashion. And I think that, if anything, the interview process continues to be a very humbling
[Guest]: process for me, because it just makes you realize how small you are in the larger aspect of
[Amit Varma]: lives or national history. And the focus on objects, you know, it struck me while
[Amit Varma]: reading your book and reading you speak about it elsewhere that, you know, there are two ways in
[Amit Varma]: which the focus on objects can really work. And one is, of course, it's a catalyst, it can
[Amit Varma]: just get them to open up when you say where did this pen come from, and they start talking about
[Amit Varma]: that and other memories flow. But also, objects can intrinsically be meaningful. Like I was very
[Amit Varma]: moved by the story that you told near the start of the book of your paternal grandmother, who
[Amit Varma]: shows you her coin collection, right? And at that moment, it's just a mundane collection of old
[Amit Varma]: coins. But then she talks about how her parents lived in this joint family thing, and her dad
[Amit Varma]: died. And the rest of the family cut them all out, even though they were staying there. And her mom
[Amit Varma]: didn't know how to cope and they didn't have any money. And one day, her mom sends her out to all
[Amit Varma]: the other relatives to, you know, get some money and none of them gives anything. And what is she
[Amit Varma]: asking for? She's asking for five rupees. And when she says that she picks up five of those
[Amit Varma]: one rupee coins, you know, there are so many other stories like this, like the lady who carries a
[Amit Varma]: sword and then you realize that that sword has a greater significance and just being the one item
[Amit Varma]: they carried with them, that when they were sort of running away through those jungles or whatever
[Amit Varma]: and getting away, she actually gave birth to her kid and that sword was used to cut the umbilical
[Amit Varma]: cord. So that's, you know, so sort of significant. There's also the you know, the ghara of lassi,
[Amit Varma]: which you spoke about, where and you know, when you were describing that bit of ghara in which
[Amit Varma]: lassi was still made every day. And it struck me that it's almost like a series of cinematic
[Amit Varma]: shots where you're zooming out where first you have an inanimate object, which is a ghara and
[Amit Varma]: then you zoom out to the making of lassi and then you zoom out to the people making it and all the
[Amit Varma]: history and everything that has happened. Were these objects intrinsically valuable to these
[Amit Varma]: people already? Or did they gain value as they sort of, you know, as these memories roll through
[Guest]: them? I think both depending on the object. So say you carried something that was
[Guest]: obviously valuable, and by that I mean monetarily valuable. Jewelry, piece of silver, an heirloom.
[Guest]: Then these objects were kept in beautiful pristine condition and brought out and sort of
[Guest]: celebrated, okay, look, we brought this from there. Look, I can put it on right now. It's
[Guest]: almost like a celebration of things, you know, and this is particularly the case with jewelry.
[Guest]: But say you brought something so mundane like a ghaz, a yardstick, and you didn't
[Guest]: use it, you weren't a cloth seller anymore in India, then what happened to the ghaz? It would
[Guest]: be sitting in a corner of your house and you would almost forget about it. That was the case with the
[Guest]: sword mentioned. Ajit Paul Kapoor runs through the jungles of Kashmir state and arrives in Jammu,
[Guest]: having given birth on the third day of her flight, and her husband uses the sword to cut her umbilical
[Guest]: cord. So in that sense, the sword literally saves her life. And yet the sword had been relegated to
[Guest]: a dusty corner of the house. Now, maybe that's because she didn't want to remember the trauma
[Guest]: attached to that flight and thereby attached to that sword as well. But this should be an example
[Guest]: of how objects can fall from grace and how they are not remembered. But generally I found if things
[Guest]: were of extreme mundane nature, books, shawls, pens, this pocket knife that my grandmother carried,
[Guest]: for example, then you would have to infuse importance into it, which also tells you about
[Guest]: what is valuable for people in the subcontinent. Right? If something is obviously sparkly and
[Guest]: glittery and has money attached to it, then you will take care of it. But if something is really
[Guest]: mundane, it is not celebrated for its virtuosity or the fact that it has survived or the fact that
[Guest]: it has seen so many important journeys. It is almost forgotten. So in a sense, if we were
[Guest]: talking about a shawl, for example, and I would say, Oh, how beautiful. And I would go on and I
[Guest]: would talk about it. They may not have cared about it at the beginning of our conversation.
[Guest]: But if by chance at the end of our two or three hour conversation, I would say,
[Guest]: can I borrow the shawl for my research? I'll return it. They would say, no, no, no. It's mine.
[Guest]: It's my mother's. It's my father's. So I think that the jump or the shift from
[Guest]: nonchalance towards a particular object, particularly mundane things to proprietorship
[Guest]: was so, um, it was almost like so cliche towards the end, because I knew that it would happen.
[Guest]: Right. Um, in that sense, I think that objects teach you a lot of things as well, right? They
[Guest]: teach you, as you said, how to be catalysts for certain things. And I think that this was a method
[Guest]: of storytelling I discovered while on the field. So because I wasn't trained in, in history or
[Guest]: English or any form of sociology, anthropology or ethnography, a lot of this had to be learned
[Guest]: on the field. And I should say that there are dedicated programs in colleges and universities
[Guest]: now that teach that. But because you have to learn everything on the field, a couple of things
[Guest]: happen. A, things are a lot harder for you, right? And you have to problem solve literally all the
[Guest]: time. But the second thing that happens is that you develop really creative ways to do things.
[Guest]: And these are things that people learn about in schools and stuff. And here you are, because you,
[Guest]: you've derived it from necessity almost. So in that sense, I think a lot of my methodology is
[Guest]: really grounded into the discovery of specific history. I am not interested in the extraneous
[Guest]: details at all. I am not interested in the larger scope of landscape. The person, no,
[Guest]: I'm interested in the nuanced, highly detailed, personal perspective of the person, because
[Guest]: the history of partition has long been relegated to numbers and figures and facts and date.
[Guest]: And I did not understand how my grandparents, all four of whom had migrated from what became
[Guest]: Pakistan to India had become numbers. I just didn't get that. So that meant that for every
[Guest]: number, there was a person's story. And I was interested in that specific story.
[Guest]: So I built methodology around trying to record the specificities of people's lives.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, one of the sort of continuous strands that comes up through your book is that many of
[Amit Varma]: these people sharing these memories, even if they're sort of insiders, even if they're part
[Amit Varma]: of the establishment at the time, to them partition is an abstract concept before it happens.
[Amit Varma]: And then it becomes concrete. And it seems to me that a lot of what this book does is also make
[Amit Varma]: the abstract concrete that very often when you talk of history, dates, events, this happened,
[Amit Varma]: that happened, it's all abstract, it's just stuff on the page. And what you've done is you've,
[Amit Varma]: of course, told all of these stories and made it kind of come to life and become so evocative for
[Amit Varma]: all of us. You know, and the interesting thing is that so many of them at the time had no idea
[Amit Varma]: what the consequences of these abstract things would be until their lives are completely overturned.
[Amit Varma]: As an interviewer did some of this sort of take you by surprise. And, you know, when you listen
[Amit Varma]: to all these stories, these people reliving memories that they might have suppressed for so
[Amit Varma]: long. And of course, you said in terms of that whole plat you method, which, you know, I shall
[Amit Varma]: have to process and perhaps try out myself, you know, it must be so emotionally charged for you
[Amit Varma]: as well to listen to these stories. And particularly when some of these people are your
[Amit Varma]: relative, so to say, and you've also descended from four people affected by partition, all your
[Guest]: grandparents. I think that interviewing your family is the hardest, because you don't know
[Guest]: what you may find. And you don't know how that may affect the day to day after that. Right.
[Guest]: And I'm not just talking about like skeletons in the closet sort of things you may find,
[Guest]: but just generally also like, just discovering the sacrifices and difficulties that they had
[Guest]: to go through really changes your perception of a person. Right. So that's one. The second thing is
[Guest]: being emotionally involved in an interview. I don't know how to explain this without
[Guest]: sounding like a very crass person. But I'm not a very emotional person. And I'm very good at
[Guest]: keeping, you know, work and personal life very separate. And I think that this is one of the
[Guest]: reasons that people are often disappointed when they meet me, because they often expect me to be
[Guest]: like a very compassionate person, always wanting to hear their stories. But in fact, it gets a lot,
[Guest]: to be honest, if you're listening to stories all the time, it gets quite mentally taxing.
[Guest]: So when I am on an interview, my main focus is to be able to record as much information
[Guest]: as possible. Because I have a rule with people, I don't see them more than once.
[Guest]: So the interview happens on one day. And it may be for two hours, or it may be for four hours,
[Guest]: it may have 10 breaks in the middle, or it may have no breaks. But I try my best not to go back
[Guest]: to the person because I find that if you go back the second and third time, then they know exactly
[Guest]: what you want to hear and how you want to hear it. So and then they would have had a chance to
[Guest]: process and reason with their history in some way. Whereas when you're talking to them for
[Guest]: the first time, if they are rediscovering something, then you are discovering it along
[Guest]: with them. So the process is very raw. But I think that you have to be very careful not to
[Guest]: entangle yourself in that conversation, because you're still having to make sense of it and ask
[Guest]: the questions. It's very easy to get swayed into the trauma and violence of what people saw and
[Guest]: lose yourself in it. And this particular thing happens to me only when I'm listening to the
[Guest]: interview again to transcribe it. When I'm in that moment, all I want to ask is a follow up
[Guest]: question. I want to ask how they feel. I want to ask what it was like. And often the responses
[Guest]: take people by surprise as well. Either because they are being asked so directly, or the fact
[Guest]: that they are being asked at all. Because for much of this generation's life, it's not that
[Guest]: they just didn't talk about it. It's also the fact that they were never asked about it. So
[Guest]: when I'm there, I'm trying to get as much information as I can. Of course, things are
[Guest]: emotional. Of course, you feel it. Of course, some of the things you hear are horribly inhuman.
[Guest]: So you can't help but feel moved by them. But you always have to remember that this story is not
[Guest]: your story, even though it may be unearthed because of you. But when you're transcribing,
[Guest]: and you're really focusing on the words people are using. For example, a thing that always gets
[Guest]: to me a lot is that people of that generation say something of that time of partition, they
[Guest]: will always say, humne body dispose kar di, we had to dispose of the body. And that word dispose,
[Guest]: it really gets to me always, because it's such a like, I would use it for, for trash. Right?
[Guest]: I would use it, you know, I'm disposing of this, I don't need it anymore. But they often use that
[Guest]: word to describe people that had died, and they had to either cremate them or bury them at the
[Guest]: time. So I think that what I'm looking out for, and I'm concentrating on is the vocabulary when
[Guest]: I'm transcribing, and that really gets to me. But again, I think that you need to make a certain
[Guest]: amount of distance from the interview. And it happens already, because you're so much younger,
[Guest]: and they're so much older. And the distance is so, so large, so vast, not in terms of generation,
[Guest]: but also in terms of time and the fact that you have social media to help you understand other
[Guest]: things and connect with other people that you feel the same thing. What was the original question?
[Amit Varma]: Oh, you know, I mean, I'm delighted that even I have sort of lost track of the original question,
[Amit Varma]: but I think you answered it. And then we went on a very amethyst digression, if I might say that,
[Amit Varma]: which is most welcome. So these are the tangents I'm talking about, like, you just get very used to
[Guest]: it, you know, because the thing is, I'm still trying to make sense of the craft of oral history.
[Guest]: I think that it's not given as much importance as it should be, particularly in the context of
[Guest]: the subcontinent. It's, you know, history from beneath, or it's only people's history. And I
[Guest]: think the biggest question I get sometimes with it that often aggravates me is, how can you trust
[Guest]: it? How can you trust memory? And how can you not? How can you not? Like, even if someone is making
[Guest]: something up, even if someone has adopted a collective history to make it their personal
[Guest]: history at the time, which is very common with partitions. So because everyone was seeing dead
[Guest]: bodies, someone who may not have seen a dead body, but only heard about it may have adopted that
[Guest]: story as their own. But even if that is the case, how can you not listen to it and hold it as a
[Guest]: valid source? Because at some point, oral history becomes a part of the subcontinent. And that's
[Guest]: because at some point, oral history becomes the only way we can actually populate these events
[Guest]: with actual details. Conventional history has not been able to do that, which is why we study
[Guest]: partition in school and not understand it to be an event that belongs to us, but an event that is so
[Guest]: far back in the pages of history that it cannot possibly have an effect on the present, which,
[Guest]: as we've seen in recent years, is obviously not the case. Partition is still trickling
[Guest]: down to generations. So I think that, I don't know, over these last, and again, going off on
[Guest]: a really weird tangent here, that I have learned how to be a champion for oral history, for people's
[Guest]: history, which I think more and more people are now. So a two part question, really, actually,
[Amit Varma]: there are a lot of questions which emerge from what you just said, which is why I keep a notebook
[Amit Varma]: with me. But a two part question to begin with, which is that, you know, one you pointed out
[Amit Varma]: during the book, and this is something that we all know that a lot of people from that generation
[Amit Varma]: who went through partition have never told these stories. And perhaps the first time they were
[Amit Varma]: talking about it was talking about it to you, even the family didn't really know these things.
[Amit Varma]: So number one, you know, why do you think so many of those people suppress these stories?
[Amit Varma]: And the second part of that is that I guess, one reason no one would have asked them about
[Amit Varma]: these stories is that they would have, it would have felt impolite that you don't want to go to
[Amit Varma]: a place where somebody else doesn't want to go, which of course, is part of your work you had to
[Amit Varma]: do. So did you, did you feel like an intruder? And did you sometimes feel guilty for, you know,
[Guest]: dredging up all this pain and trauma from the past? Yes, yes, sometimes, not always, though,
[Guest]: because that's what you're there for. But I remember, you know, distinctly remember this
[Guest]: interview that actually happened after the book was published. So I haven't, I haven't actually
[Guest]: written about it anywhere. But I remember interviewing this couple in Gurgaon. And the
[Guest]: woman had come from erstwhile J&K state. And she had traveled to Jammu with her cute, with this
[Guest]: huge family. And so the details that came out of that interview, they left on Karva Chauth day.
[Guest]: And how she knows that is because it was a full moon. It was a full moon. And she knows everyone
[Guest]: was fasting, all the women were fasting. So she was particular to tell me that we left on Karva
[Guest]: Chauth day. And they left with a really big group of people. And they left in such a hurry that they
[Guest]: actually left behind her sister. She was sleeping in the house, and they just left her behind. And
[Guest]: she was an older sister for her. So all these people are migrating to India at the time. And,
[Guest]: you know, in, there was not a lot of migration that happened in August 47 in J&K. The migration
[Guest]: only started in October, November with attacks from what were called Kabalis at that time. Now
[Guest]: who is a Kabali? What is a Kabali? It's difficult to say. But they call it Kabali. So I will call
[Guest]: it Kabali as well. And so she is saying that we are running and people are running after us. And
[Guest]: there's a lot of confusion. And we end up in this little house or small fort like thing. And we are
[Guest]: all taking shelter there. And then my aunt starts passing out what is called Ram Nam Ki Goli,
[Guest]: which is cyanide pills. And they're passing that they're breaking and she gets a small piece and
[Guest]: everyone is ingesting them so that they don't have to meet a worst fate. If you have to die,
[Guest]: die at your own hands, then something worse. So she puts it in her mouth. She's very young at the
[Guest]: time. I don't think she was older than four or five. She puts it in her mouth and she finds it
[Guest]: very bitter. So she spits it out. In that sense, she saves her life. And from the large party that
[Guest]: had left, I think four people remain. And they come to India, I believe they come to Delhi.
[Guest]: And the sister is still missing. And they just, they figure when they reach here, they just
[Guest]: know when they reach here, she's been left behind and not much can be done. Ultimately, she's picked
[Guest]: up by a Muslim man there, taken to his house. He takes care of her as his child. He then takes her
[Guest]: after a couple of years to a camp, where she realizes that someone from the family has been
[Guest]: looking for her all this time and they are reunited. And now, this narrating this incident
[Guest]: is causing this woman a lot of pain, right? Because, but it's not a, I can't explain it because
[Guest]: she was so young at the time, the pain is also very childlike. So the ways in which she describes
[Guest]: it is, when I saw my sister, I didn't recognize that she was my sister. But I remember what she
[Guest]: was wearing. She was wearing a dress. And she was very, very thin. And she was walking down the
[Guest]: stairs. And I saw her for the first time. And I had to be reintroduced to my sister.
[Guest]: She tells me that she lost almost all her family on that journey. And then she says,
[Guest]: I don't blame Muslims for it. In fact, I don't blame anyone for it.
[Guest]: Those were the times. And then she leaves the room and she goes to make a cup of tea. Now,
[Guest]: I don't know whether she left the room because she was overwhelmed or she left the room simply
[Guest]: because she had to make a cup of tea for us. But her husband who's been sitting in on this
[Guest]: conversation, he turns to me and says, come help me take out the clothes from outside.
[Guest]: And I walk with him. And while we're walking, he says, why are you asking these questions?
[Guest]: Don't you see the pain that you're causing?
[Guest]: And it's just like, how do you respond to that? You know, I didn't know what to say. I was just,
[Guest]: on one hand, this is your work. Because if you don't do it, then no one will know.
[Guest]: And no one will know. That means people will repeat this again and again. So on one level,
[Guest]: you're recording for public knowledge, to make sure something like this never happens again.
[Guest]: On the other hand, saying this may be causing someone pain, subliminal pain also, that they
[Guest]: may not be telling you. And who knows what kind of conversations emerge after you leave that house.
[Guest]: So what did I do in that moment? So the gentleman takes off all the clothes that are drying outside,
[Guest]: he takes them inside. And then the clothes string is like very prickly. So he takes it off and
[Guest]: the clothes string is like very prickly, that kind of plastic jute. I didn't know what else to do.
[Guest]: So I just held on to it really tight until I felt some physical pain. And then I let it go.
[Guest]: And I don't know why I did that. But I just felt really sad because of what he said. But he was
[Guest]: right. He was right, you know. And you do feel like you're causing people pain. Of course, not
[Guest]: everyone, not everyone. But then sometimes when stories are this traumatic, I don't know, I want
[Guest]: to hope that some form of healing happens after I leave. But you can never be certain about that.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, what you earlier said about sort of that your general demeanor is sort of not to be
[Amit Varma]: affected by this and you just get the work done and you're affected by it. I'm also struck by
[Amit Varma]: someone who told me an identical thing. I don't know if you heard that episode, Amardeep Singh,
[Amit Varma]: the historian of Nanak's Travels and so on. And, you know, I did an episode with him and he
[Amit Varma]: spoke about how he went to Mirpur once, where if I remember correctly, many of his family had...
[Guest]: His family is from Muzaffarabad actually. I know him well and I know his work well,
[Guest]: but this particular story is also from Mirpur.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah. So how he went to Mirpur and some distant members of his family or people he knew
[Amit Varma]: were sort of things that happened there. And I asked him, you know, was it an emotional moment
[Amit Varma]: to, you know, walk by the banks of the same river and all of that? And he was like, no,
[Amit Varma]: not at all. Completely detached. And it's later when you view the tapes and you
[Amit Varma]: go through the equipment again, that the emotion really happens. That struck me.
[Amit Varma]: The other thing that kind of struck me and just take me through your process of making the choices
[Amit Varma]: you made here is that, you know, while speaking during this brief conversation so far, you've,
[Amit Varma]: you know, used these phrases like body ko dispose kar diya aur us zamane mein halat hi aise the.
[Amit Varma]: And these words have a flavor, which is very hard to capture in pure English or it's very,
[Amit Varma]: you know, I think a lot of the language would be very hard to capture. And what you have,
[Amit Varma]: of course, done is while, you know, most of it is in very clear and evocative English,
[Amit Varma]: you also use, you know, many bits of the original Punjabi or whatever for the flavor,
[Amit Varma]: which I sort of appreciated because I think that, you know, gave me a sense of,
[Amit Varma]: it's almost like you hear the person speaking and that's also very evocative.
[Amit Varma]: So how do you then make those choices of what to do about the language? Because the thing is,
[Amit Varma]: it's not that you're just listening to one or two languages, you're listening to Punjabi and
[Amit Varma]: Urdu and Hindi, but you're listening to all kinds of different ways of speaking. Like you,
[Amit Varma]: you mentioned someone you met in Pakistan, who was talking in a particular Patiala kind of
[Amit Varma]: accent and whatever. And, but then you are writing a book in English,
[Amit Varma]: or even if you're doing an art project, whatever there is accompanying it is in English. So how do
[Amit Varma]: you make these choices that, how do I get this flavor across? Because it is impossible to
[Guest]: translate, right? So... I think it connects to what you were originally saying about writing
[Guest]: for foreign papers. Why do you need to write? I mean, I guess the question is, are you not
[Guest]: writing for your own people? And if you are writing for your own people, then put something
[Guest]: in there that they will relate to. English is not our language. English is a language that I think
[Guest]: in. English is my first language. But for so many of us, the past is rendered through regional
[Guest]: languages. And while I realized that I couldn't write a book entirely in regional languages,
[Guest]: there are some things that I wouldn't say are untranslatable, but I would say that they don't
[Guest]: get the significance of the experience across as well in English. I'll give you an example,
[Guest]: you gave several. I'll give you another one. The same woman who was talking about Patiala and
[Guest]: Samana said, woh hum takseeme hin kabhi bhula nahi paayenge. To which I translate, I'll never
[Guest]: forget the partition of India. But it's not the same. It's not the same because takseeme hin
[Guest]: carries with it a history. A history of hin and a history of that line. Takseeme toh line huni thi.
[Guest]: It carries with it such a specific history that partition cannot, just the word partition in
[Guest]: India, it cannot put across in the same way. So I think that the decision about language was
[Guest]: pretty conscious and I knew always that I was going to do it. There was just no question about
[Guest]: it. If you read my UK and US editions, they also have the exact same phrases because you're writing
[Guest]: for your people. It is people's voices. And you know, with Indians and Pakistanis also,
[Guest]: we do this thing where we say things, we say the same thing in two or three different ways. So for
[Guest]: me, I know I'll say the same thing in Hindi, then I'll say it in Punjabi, then I'll say it in English
[Guest]: also. Or we mix our languages, which is quite unusual. Because I don't know if other people
[Guest]: in other parts of the world do this as well. So you know, to mix several languages within the
[Guest]: same sentence. And I think that it's a part of, it's a part of our culture, isn't it like a part
[Guest]: of our colloquial? So I did it as well. I did the same thing. Why not? I hate the sense that
[Guest]: people don't consider their home market important enough. And I hate that because for me, the home
[Guest]: market is where I do my research. It is people in the subcontinent, India, Pakistan, Bangladesh,
[Guest]: who give me the history, who give me access to their history. They are the most important for
[Guest]: me, no matter how popular you may become in any book anywhere in the world. I don't think that
[Guest]: I would like to forget that I write for my people. And by my people, I mean in people in India,
[Guest]: people of Pakistan, people of Bangladesh, I don't see a difference in that.
[Amit Varma]: You know, when you speak about how you write for the people of India, Pakistan, Bangladesh,
[Amit Varma]: you don't really see a difference that we're all sort of one people. This is a quote from
[Amit Varma]: your book, which I really liked where you quote Ran Neville as saying, quote, when Hindus, Muslims
[Amit Varma]: and Sikhs broke sugarcane or ate aloo puri, they did so in the same fashion. When they went to buy
[Amit Varma]: wares at Anarkali Bazaar, they did so together. This was, is a shared Punjabi culture, and it had
[Amit Varma]: little to do with religion, stop quote. And you know, I had traveled, I'd spent a couple of months
[Amit Varma]: in Pakistan in 2006, when I was covering the cricket tour there, I'd gone to all these places.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, one of the first things that struck me, though it's a cliche, and I should
[Amit Varma]: have expected it, but it struck me was that I didn't feel I was away from home. Apart from,
[Amit Varma]: you know, seeing Urdu signs everywhere, it was, one, I didn't feel I was away from home. And two,
[Amit Varma]: it also struck me, again, that old cliche about how people contain multitudes, that the same person
[Amit Varma]: may be living in an Islamic state and maybe a believer and all of that. But at the same time,
[Amit Varma]: there is a Punjabi earth and there is a hospitality and there is all of that culture. So on the one
[Amit Varma]: hand, you may have your president banning kite flying on a particular festival. But on the other
[Amit Varma]: hand, that's what your community does, and you're jolly well going to do it. And it seems to me that
[Amit Varma]: what happens during partition is that a stress on only one aspect of identity, then it's almost like
[Amit Varma]: you've spoken not just of the physical displacement, but also of the mental displacement.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems to me that at some level, it's almost as if who you are is being partially partitioned,
[Amit Varma]: where you're saying that this part of your identity is critical, and this is going to
[Amit Varma]: displace you. And this is everything to us to the state now. And the rest of all of those things
[Amit Varma]: which are common to you, how you eat aloo puri or how you bond over sugarcane juices is kind of
[Amit Varma]: lost. And yet, it seems to me that many of the people you spoke to, you know, have sort of
[Amit Varma]: retained an appreciation of that multiplicity of whatever makes them what they are. What are your
[Amit Varma]: sort of thoughts? Do you see, like, did you see a lot of bitterness people slipping back into
[Amit Varma]: sort of, you know, that aspect of what happened? Or was it just a sense of zamana hi vasatha and
[Guest]: whatever? I mean, it depends. Now you can't generalize anything with partition and nor
[Guest]: should you. And I think that we make the mistake not just with partition, but also in life to think
[Guest]: of people as binaries. So that if you're not this, you must be this. And if you're not that,
[Guest]: you must be this, right? And this is unfair, because people have, as you mentioned,
[Guest]: multiplicity of facets within them, and they all contribute to making up that person.
[Guest]: It just so happens that at the time of partition, a lot of these facets may have been contradictory
[Guest]: to one another. How do you live with that? And I think that this became most apparent in Pakistan,
[Guest]: that a person could feel zealously nationalistic for the cause of Pakistan, yet deeply in longing
[Guest]: of the home they left behind in India by choice. And this is very complicated. This is extremely
[Guest]: complicated. Another interesting thing that I found there is that I would hear general statements
[Guest]: like, usamane mein hindu toh bade intolerant thi, hindu ne yeh kara, hindu ne woh kara, which is so
[Guest]: similar to how we hear ya musalmano ne usamane mein yeh kara, ya musalmano ne usamane mein woh kara.
[Guest]: And yet at the same time, here I was, a Hindu, sitting in Pakistan, in someone's house,
[Guest]: obviously the other. First time I had felt like the other. And there people were saying,
[Guest]: hindu toh us zaman mein yeh kar rahe the, woh kar rahe the, katal kar rahe the, lekin beta tum toh
[Guest]: bilkul family ki dara. And I would say, par main bhi toh hindu, I am also Hindu. And they would say,
[Guest]: mein hindu toh beti woh. So this, what does this tell us about people's psyche? It says that we
[Guest]: are okay vilifying a community of people, particularly for an event in the past. But the
[Guest]: minute a person from that community becomes a personal acquaintance, we find it very difficult
[Guest]: to put them in the same category. Which obviously means that large populations of Indians and
[Guest]: Pakistanis are okay saying Pakistani kharab hai or Hindustani kharab hai. But if they meet an
[Guest]: Indian or a Pakistani, say in Switzerland or Canada or America, or even in Dubai, or even
[Guest]: in their own hometown, the perception may change. It is the personal, right? I don't know, it's very
[Guest]: complicated. These multiple notions of identity and memory and belonging and unbelonging. When I
[Guest]: was doing the interviews, I wasn't thinking about any of this. But then you hear people make
[Guest]: contradictions in their own speech, things like what I just mentioned. And you think to yourself
[Guest]: that partition as an event is also a contradictory event. It made people make decisions that they may
[Guest]: not have known completely at the moment. At the beginning of the conversation, you mentioned that
[Guest]: you were shocked by how little people, even in the governance understood what the word partition
[Guest]: meant. And till date, if I asked my grandmother about what exactly happened at the time of
[Guest]: partition, and why did you move from your home in the frontier province to Delhi, a trip that would
[Guest]: have taken you three days to make, she would say fasaad the, dange the, riots the. But she doesn't
[Guest]: know where it started, what started. If you ask any common person from that generation,
[Guest]: have you ever seen an Englishman? They will more than likely say no. So the people that allegedly
[Guest]: drew this line and allegedly divided the country and also propagated the idea of divide and rule
[Guest]: were never even seen by common people. And I think that this should tell you the incredible
[Guest]: disconnect that happened at the political level vis-a-vis the personal level. The people moved
[Guest]: entire homes because of the boomers. Hawaayin chal rahi thi. Because of danger, because of fear,
[Guest]: because of misunderstanding. And that's just heartbreaking. Which is why I say halaat the.
[Guest]: It was the time. We didn't have enough news. We didn't have enough sources that we could trust.
[Guest]: People weren't even educated. Ek badi mazedaar kahaani maine record kari thi of Burewal Mandi
[Guest]: in Multan, where this woman tells me that ek radio tha and every day at 9pm that radio would be heard
[Guest]: by everyone in the village. Hindu, Muslim, Sikh, it didn't matter. You would sit at that family's
[Guest]: home. One family, Muslim family had a radio. You would hear the news. That is how we learnt about
[Guest]: the war starting. That is how we learnt about the war ending. Second world war. That is how we
[Guest]: learnt about partition. It was during that 9pm news that my brother was born and everyone celebrated.
[Guest]: And it was during that 9pm news that people became strangers and enemies. Because we were
[Guest]: told that partition is happening. How can you describe that? How can you justify that? I am
[Guest]: still, this is the thing. I don't think that there are any answers to these questions.
[Guest]: That how is it that Hindus, Muslims, Sikhs, everyone from that village, men, women, children
[Guest]: are listening to a radio every day. And then suddenly a radio broadcast tells them that
[Guest]: partition is happening and you need to go this way, you need to go that way. Do they become
[Guest]: enemies? What happens? How does the creation of the other happen? I think that these are things
[Guest]: that even people who lived through at that time are still trying to figure out. Just that we have
[Amit Varma]: more distance from it. That's all. Yeah. And just sort of thinking aloud,
[Amit Varma]: I mean, this goes back to what I was sort of saying earlier about the abstract versus the
[Amit Varma]: concrete that, you know, some of the multitudes we contain, for example, we might be deeply
[Amit Varma]: nationalistic, but in a toxic way at one level, but at another level, we are friends with everyone
[Amit Varma]: we know and we behave very nicely with them and all of that. And it strikes me that one is an
[Amit Varma]: abstract concept, that kind of nationalism and the grievances of the past and all that. But the
[Amit Varma]: other is a concrete thing, the people we actually know. So similarly, you know, when these gentlemen
[Amit Varma]: sit with you and you're in their home and they tell you, oh, Hindus are intolerant, that's an
[Amit Varma]: abstract statement to make. But you are the concrete Hindu in front of them. So they're like,
[Amit Varma]: and the same thing about the radio. And the bizarre thing is that these people sitting together,
[Amit Varma]: listening to the radio, that community, that's a concrete thing. And yet, it is broken up by that
[Amit Varma]: abstract notion of, you know, you are actually enemies and that sort of the dominance of the
[Amit Varma]: abstract over the concrete. And you know, why we need these abstract things in the first place
[Amit Varma]: is sort of, again, fascinating to me. And I'm just like completely thinking aloud here.
[Guest]: So that's what I do every day. You know, Amit, like you could have heard hundreds of stories
[Guest]: as I have. And you can hope that you come up with some concrete answer for why this happened.
[Guest]: And I'm telling you, as someone who's trying to do it, there are no answers, there are only
[Guest]: versions. There are only versions of what happened, which only tells you that, you know, no matter
[Guest]: how many people you speak to, there'll be more versions, and more contradictions and more
[Guest]: complications. But was it worth it? Was it actually worth it? If you ask India, Pakistan,
[Guest]: Bangladesh, you may get different answers. And that's also a real, it's a real tragedy that
[Guest]: the countries that partition happened to India, Pakistan, East Pakistan, later Bangladesh,
[Guest]: and England don't have a shared official history of the event. So no matter who you ask, you will
[Guest]: get a different answer based on their national allegiance. Yeah, and people will rationalize
[Amit Varma]: and we don't know counterfactual. So it's just too complicated. I mean, I don't think there can be
[Amit Varma]: a shared national history. I was kind of struck by the fact that, you know, you were musing on
[Amit Varma]: this very same question long before your project started. I came across this quote in an old
[Amit Varma]: feature on you by your friend Mayank Austin Sufi, the awesome blogger. And you had said at that
[Amit Varma]: time, and this is 2010, when you're just 20 years old at the time. Was this with the horrible
[Guest]: photograph of me with the bang in Jaan on a ship? Yeah, it took me a while to figure out that was
[Amit Varma]: you. But they're really nice photographs. I mean, yeah. And you said, quote, I want to know why we
[Amit Varma]: Indians and Pakistanis are so different as masses, and so alike as individuals. Stop quote. And this
[Amit Varma]: has, of course, struck me every time I have actually interacted with Pakistanis, including
[Amit Varma]: in Pakistan, where the, you know, the warmth I received was a bit too much. And that's something
[Amit Varma]: that is, you know, visible in your book also, because you sort of intermingle all the chapters
[Amit Varma]: with people who've gone there from here and people who have come here from there.
[Guest]: Right? That was a conscious decision, actually. And I decided that at a very early stage that
[Guest]: I was not going to divide the chapters by Hindu, Muslim, or Sikh, or Indian, Pakistani, Bangladeshi
[Guest]: or English. It was by alphabetical order. So if there were two women, one after the other,
[Guest]: that was fine. If there were two Pakistanis, one after the other, that was fine. If there
[Guest]: were two stories of shawls, one after the other, that was also fine. But it felt like the only
[Guest]: fair way where anyone and everyone would get a chance to say what they had to say and be on a
[Guest]: level feet. So I mean, I'm very clear about things like that.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I figured it was a deliberate, though not by alphabetical order, but I figured it was a
[Amit Varma]: deliberate intermingling and that totally worked for me. Because sometimes I'd be reading a chapter
[Amit Varma]: and I'd actually for a moment, I'd forget and I'd have to go back to the start of the chapter.
[Amit Varma]: Alphabetical order of first name or last name?
[Guest]: It was first name. And the only time I broke that was the first chapter, which is about the
[Guest]: Ghazan Dukhara, which is a man starting with Y, my great granduncle. But it was the beginning of
[Guest]: the project. So I figured that it was best to put it at the front. Otherwise, it's by first name.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, which is great, because, you know, you are, of course, Anshul and I'm Amit and I much prefer
[Amit Varma]: alphabetical order of first name. There have actually been studies which show that
[Amit Varma]: in the academic sciences, because you have the convention of going by alphabetical order of
[Amit Varma]: last name, people whose names begin with the later letters actually do worse over time,
[Amit Varma]: because in citations, it is the other guy's name, plus etc, or whatever. So I think was it in a
[Amit Varma]: Gladwell book that I read it, whatever, but, you know, more power to you. And I can totally see
[Amit Varma]: why you do alphabetical order of first name.
[Guest]: But it just seemed like it was the only way someone wouldn't give preference to one
[Guest]: nationality over the other. And the point was, to forget who this person is and where they are
[Guest]: coming from and to just focus on their story. And that's what I have done.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah. And it worked like a charm. Let's take a quick commercial break. And then when we
[Amit Varma]: come back, we shall talk more about, you know, your journey back in time and your discoveries
[Amit Varma]: while talking to people about their objects and their memories.
[Amit Varma]: On the scene and the unseen, I often speak about positive sum games. Well, if you want to be
[Amit Varma]: surrounded by beauty, and you love fine art, I have a win win proposition for you. Head on over
[Amit Varma]: to Indian colors.com. Indian colors licenses images of fine art from some of the best
[Amit Varma]: contemporary artists in India and adapts them to objects of everyday use like tote bags, pouches
[Amit Varma]: and home decor items. You get to surround yourself with the finest modern Indian art at affordable
[Amit Varma]: prices and artists get royalties for every product you buy. Win win game. The Indian colors new
[Amit Varma]: ranges in and includes elegant yet comfortable dresses for women and casual shirts for men with
[Amit Varma]: standout motifs by artists such as Tanmay Samanta, Manisha Gera Baswari, Shruti Nelson, Pradeep
[Amit Varma]: Mishra and Jaydeep Mehrotra. Stay home but dress smart. And if you're missing your friends in these
[Amit Varma]: lockdown days, worry not. You can show them you're thinking of them by buying gifts for them from
[Amit Varma]: Indian colors. Corporate gifting is also available. So head on over to Indian colors.com. There's
[Amit Varma]: colors with an OU and make art a part of your life. And hey, for a 15% discount, use the code
[Amit Varma]: unseen. That's right. Unseen for 15% off at Indian colors.com. Welcome back to the scene and the
[Amit Varma]: unseen. I'm chatting with Anshul Malhotra about her job as a keeper of memory as it were and even
[Amit Varma]: a drawer out of memory. Let's in fact talk about memory. I mean, which is also so fascinating to
[Amit Varma]: me and you alluded briefly earlier in this discussion. And I've got a couple of quotes
[Amit Varma]: from your book, which I also sort of want to ask you about. The first one goes this way, quote,
[Amit Varma]: if you imagine an experience to be the construction of a memory, then it's recollection
[Amit Varma]: years later can be defined as this reconstruction. As the years pass memory inherently malleable,
[Amit Varma]: accumulates many perforations that can be filled with new experiences, imagine fabricated,
[Amit Varma]: and sometimes even a seamless integration of several unconnected memories into one.
[Amit Varma]: Therefore, it is possible to change or alters one's original memory, depending on the conditions
[Amit Varma]: in which it is recalled. And sort of before I come to the next quote, it sort of strike me,
[Amit Varma]: you know, one of the things that I have, in fact, read recently about memory is that the first time
[Amit Varma]: we remember an experience, we remember it. But the second time we are remembering the remembering it.
[Amit Varma]: And like that, as we keep reconstructing it, we can sort of add layers onto it. And all of us,
[Amit Varma]: you know, just assume that, oh, I remember it so well, and so vividly, and yet, memory is so
[Guest]: incredibly flawed. So, you know, one thing that like, it's a very basic example,
[Guest]: when you're a child, and you have a certain experience, and this has happened to me several
[Guest]: times. And then when you get older, and you ask your parent, hey, remember that,
[Guest]: that day that we did that thing? And they're always like, No, no, that's not what happened.
[Guest]: It was like this. And you're like, No, I remember it was like this. And the parent is like, No, no,
[Guest]: it was like that. So you're both thinking of the same memory, but it is mediated by your
[Amit Varma]: newer experiences. Yeah, yeah. And you know, another of the things that we do know is that
[Amit Varma]: so much of memory can be constructed by suggestion or, you know, by like you said,
[Amit Varma]: you don't meet them a second time, because by that time, you know, they could be framing things
[Amit Varma]: according to how what you want to hear and not necessarily even consciously. So what have you
[Amit Varma]: learned about memory and all of this time, while while you've been doing this?
[Guest]: What I've learned is probably contradictory to itself is that on one level,
[Guest]: we cannot trust true memory, because there is no true memory. On the other level, memory is
[Guest]: probably the most intimate source in building a personal past. There is no way that you will be
[Guest]: able to furnish the lives of people with any form of academic history when it comes to partition.
[Guest]: And so you have to rely on memory because you have to understand the perspectives and versions of
[Guest]: what happened. So in that sense, memory is essential. Right. And your other quote about
[Amit Varma]: the different kinds of memory, and I found this quite profound, where you said, quote,
[Amit Varma]: there is the official memory of the state, one that strives to document the official facts and
[Amit Varma]: figures. There is political memory, the kind that is recorded in newspapers, journals and the
[Amit Varma]: political attributions of the time. There is geographic memory, the recollection of one's
[Amit Varma]: soil, the kind of memory that gets lost within the sand and rain of a land that now possesses a new
[Amit Varma]: name. There is a personal memory, which involves one's personal experiences. There is collective
[Amit Varma]: memory, the memory of society of a people, neighborhood or family. And then there is
[Amit Varma]: another brand, the kind that takes years to ferment, a memory residing between fact and fiction,
[Amit Varma]: a diluted, malleable memory that encompasses all of the above, coupled with the key ingredient of
[Amit Varma]: time. This is a kind of memory passed down through one's genealogy, a generational memory
[Amit Varma]: that I and many others being descendants of those men and women who witnessed a partition
[Amit Varma]: have inherited. And, you know, you began the project in a sense by, you know, speaking to
[Amit Varma]: your grandparents about memories that in a sense are part of your origin story as well. I mean,
[Amit Varma]: had partition not happened, who knows, you wouldn't have been here. I know, I think about
[Amit Varma]: that all the time. And I would have lost this episode. So been probably talking about policy
[Amit Varma]: with some boring man. But anyway, yeah. So did you feel that, that in a sense, that if there is,
[Amit Varma]: you know, a sense of self that also comes from collective memory, that, you know, listening to
[Amit Varma]: these stories is also sort of adding to your sense of self in a way, I won't say adding to your
[Amit Varma]: memory, as it were, but adding to your sense of self and who you are, and just adding a layer
[Guest]: to the past? Yes, definitely. I mean, one thing that I would say is, it struck me how different
[Guest]: the official memory was from personal memory. That's the first thing. Like, I couldn't believe
[Guest]: the stories I was hearing was so different from the stories I'd read in textbooks and books,
[Guest]: which obviously meant that there had been a gap. There had been a large void in understanding
[Guest]: what happened to people at the time. But I think every single interview I do, whether it's with
[Guest]: my family or someone else, it adds to an understanding of me being a person of this land.
[Guest]: I don't know whether it adds to my memory, as you say, because, you know, these memories don't
[Guest]: belong to me. As I said, even if they have been uncovered by me, they are not mine. But at the
[Guest]: same time, I think it gives me a sense of grounding, in a sense of belonging to a certain
[Guest]: place. So I'll give you an example. Before I went to Lahore for the first time in 2014,
[Guest]: or Pakistan in general, for that matter, I had recorded so many stories of people in India who
[Guest]: had lived in different parts of Pakistan, that when I set foot on that land, I did not, for a
[Guest]: minute, think that I didn't know it. It felt so seamless, because I somehow knew its core, its
[Guest]: heart, its heart was undivided India. And I understood that part. And I think I was open,
[Guest]: so the city was open to me. And I never felt like it wasn't mine. So I think that in conversations
[Guest]: with people, you can understand, you can understand in principle, in theory, in life and
[Guest]: life and memory, the heart of undivided India, and it adds to you, of course, it adds to you,
[Amit Varma]: how can it not? And you know, one of the chapters, which I like a lot, and for the, you know,
[Amit Varma]: listeners, there are like 21 chapters, which are all incredible personal stories. I mean,
[Amit Varma]: each of them could be a movie or a series on its own. So if there's someone from Netflix,
[Amit Varma]: listening, kindly get in touch with Anshul, even if you have other authors on your list,
[Amit Varma]: go by alphabetical order or first name. But the chapter of yours, which I really enjoyed,
[Amit Varma]: was a one on Prabhjot Singh, which was one a fascinating love story, how all of that unfolded,
[Amit Varma]: which I won't talk about, leave it to the reader to discover. And these two little snapshots of
[Amit Varma]: memory. And one is where she says, quote, we scrambled in leaving the house as it was,
[Amit Varma]: we had all been eating dinner, I had been making the chapatis on the open chulha. And with the
[Amit Varma]: confusion of the convoy arriving, I even left the chulha on. I remember thinking only much later
[Amit Varma]: about the fate of the chapati left over the open fire, stop quote. And this is such a fantastic
[Guest]: image. Like she's a poet, these little things that she remembers. And you know, like,
[Guest]: note that I met her at a very late stage in her life. Like I met her at late 80s. And then I met
[Guest]: her three years after that. And then the next year she died. So the fact that she remembered these
[Guest]: incredibly poetic, just okay, I'm not going to ruin anything, go on, go on to the second aspect
[Amit Varma]: of the thing. No, no, I mean, just to sort of elaborate on this, I think it can happen in
[Amit Varma]: everybody's life that you remember these little things, but you don't notice you're remembering
[Amit Varma]: and it is a noticing of the remembering that I think makes you a poet. And you know, I'm going
[Amit Varma]: to in fact, give this example to my writing students as an example of how you can, you know,
[Amit Varma]: focus on the concrete and not the abstract and make something come alive. I think also the bit,
[Guest]: sorry to interrupt you, also the bit when she talks about in the train, you know, everyone
[Guest]: talks about trains, like everyone talks about how cramped the train is and how difficult it was and
[Guest]: how suffocated and how afraid people were. But she goes on to give really concrete examples,
[Guest]: like I'm wearing a black chadar. And through my chadar, the blood of other people is seeping in
[Guest]: so I can see a pool of blood in my black chadar. That is how dark the blood was. And I think that
[Guest]: like for those examples, those bring up such visceral memories, even if you may not have seen
[Guest]: anything like that, immediately you know what she's talking about. No, and that's the second
[Amit Varma]: memory I was referring to, which is just such an incredible, incredible image that she's left the
[Amit Varma]: chapati on the chula and gone to the station with her family and they wait a long time for a train.
[Amit Varma]: And when the train arrives is completely silent. And then they get in and they discover why
[Amit Varma]: it's full of dead bodies, everybody's been killed, but there's no time to offload anyone.
[Amit Varma]: So they make the rest of the journey with the dead bodies living in the dead together,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and you have suitcases of dead people lying there. And as you described through the
[Amit Varma]: black chadar, the blood and all of that, and it is just such an incredible image that I am just
[Amit Varma]: amazed that no filmmaker has yet sort of picked me up. So kind of incredibly powerful. And of course,
[Amit Varma]: like you said, she's a poet. So I guess that's sort of where it was coming from. But you know,
[Amit Varma]: when you were writing it, is this something that when you were interviewing these people,
[Amit Varma]: especially, is this something that you were looking for all of these concrete, vivid things?
[Guest]: Yes, because I'm an artist. That is why like, I sometimes feel really sad for not
[Guest]: spending time in the studio. But this is how it comes out. Because when you make,
[Guest]: when you make a piece of art, you're looking for the concrete ways in which people can enter that
[Guest]: piece of art. You're looking for the relatable images. Why would you not do the same thing in
[Guest]: a writing practice? I was always looking for the images, always, whether it is in the way that
[Guest]: people spoke, in the gestures that they had, in the way that light fell on them, the colors of
[Guest]: their clothes, the colors of their hands, their hair. That was, I was preoccupied completely,
[Guest]: because that's what my training has been to look for the details. And I think that in that sense,
[Guest]: I'm very grateful that I don't have an education in either history or English or ethnography.
[Guest]: Because I know that the way that Rembrandts is written, it just is a melange of the visual art
[Guest]: and the textual practice. It is. And another choice that you made during the writing,
[Amit Varma]: which I meant to ask you when I was asking you about the writing earlier, which I found
[Amit Varma]: interesting, is that you don't document what they say, you document the conversation.
[Amit Varma]: So you're also sort of documenting your own responses to what they are saying. Why that
[Amit Varma]: choice? Because, you know, others have, for example, treated it differently and just taken
[Amit Varma]: the words and, you know, put nothing between those and, and the reader. And yet part of this
[Amit Varma]: is also your journey of discovery and understanding which is coming across.
[Guest]: I think that you answered the question. And it's about me. Of course, it's about me. It's about me
[Guest]: learning about my history and other people like me. So why would I not report how I feel,
[Guest]: even if that feeling is of naivety? There could have been no other way. Because if someone is
[Guest]: saying something horrific, and I say something in response to that, like, how did you feel?
[Guest]: That response is genuine. I can't imagine how it felt. I wasn't there. But I want to know.
[Guest]: And I know that the reader who's my age is thinking the same thing. How did it feel?
[Guest]: How could you do this? This story, Remnants, is about me. It is about my generation. It is about
[Guest]: the generation who has inherited these memories without actual knowledge of what happened.
[Guest]: And I always, I don't know, it makes me feel really sad that we hear snippets of these stories
[Guest]: and we can never make sense of them because they were never told to us in full. Because there was
[Guest]: so much shame and sadness and pain attached or fear attached to the telling of that story,
[Guest]: that it was never told to us start to finish. I always ask, how do you begin the conversation,
[Guest]: you know? And for me, it's always really weird. Like if I have to ask my grandmother something,
[Guest]: or my father something about this time, it'll always be like dilly-dallying around. And at
[Guest]: the end, when someone is getting up to leave, I'll be like, listen, tell me, you know that time
[Guest]: that partition took place? And it's like this really heavy conversation, but I am missing my
[Guest]: window of chance and I need to ask it now. But how do you begin? Like what are the words you use?
[Guest]: And then is the onus of asking not on you rather than on the person who's witnessed it?
[Guest]: We very unfairly say that we were never told stories. I was never told stories ever,
[Guest]: never. But is that not, I should ask, I should have asked, right? So I think that all these
[Guest]: questions that I'm asking in the book are questions I know people my age are also asking
[Guest]: to their families and they're trying to make sense. So I get a lot of messages from people
[Guest]: saying I employed the same methods you used in the book to talk to my family and it worked.
[Guest]: And that's what you're doing. That's it. I mean, honestly, this may be a document for India,
[Guest]: Pakistan, Bangladesh, but it is also a public service as to how one can ask questions in
[Guest]: their family, difficult questions, questions that you're afraid to hear the answers of,
[Guest]: questions that people are afraid to say the answers of. I don't know. I feel like this
[Guest]: document will outlive me because it is for a generation. It is for a generation. That's it.
[Amit Varma]: And also because I think, you know, narratives of the past shape so much of what is happening
[Amit Varma]: in the present and history is weaponized so casually that I think, you know, history is
[Amit Varma]: like this sort of play a part in, you know, highlighting the concrete over the abstract as
[Amit Varma]: it were, and highlighting the lives of real people and what they go through. I was, you know,
[Amit Varma]: struck by another sort of stand in your book that while on one hand in the present day, you are
[Amit Varma]: making objects come alive for these people and exploring their lives and, you know, bringing
[Amit Varma]: those objects alive. But on the other hand, one of the things that we realize through your book
[Amit Varma]: in different parts is how living people can be treated like things because of circumstances,
[Amit Varma]: how, you know, for example, in the chapter about General JN Sharma, he's talking about the time
[Amit Varma]: he was in the army at Rawalpindi. And he writes, quote, one day, a few of us were driving around
[Amit Varma]: the city trying to keep the peace and we heard a baby's cry. The drains were all open in those
[Amit Varma]: days. And so we stopped to find this one-year-old child abandoned in the drain. The boy's hands and
[Amit Varma]: feet had been cut off, maybe by the writers or whoever, don't ask me. These were good Indians.
[Amit Varma]: And by that, I mean, good Indians, good Pakistanis, good Bangladeshis, they're all the same.
[Amit Varma]: But when they begin writing, when they begin looting and raping and killing the innocent
[Amit Varma]: under the spell of unexplainable bloodlust, then they are the worst people in the world. It was
[Amit Varma]: such an unthinkable act. And the boy's body must have been bleeding for a while since it lay in a
[Amit Varma]: pool of blood. He hadn't died yet, though he was screaming in pain, a limbless body. I can never
[Amit Varma]: forget that sight. And he goes on to talk about how one of his colleagues said, shall we shoot him
[Amit Varma]: and put him out of his misery? And he can't get himself to do that. And later on, you write
[Amit Varma]: completely from a sort of a different angle. When you're writing the chapter on Ajit Kaur
[Amit Varma]: Kapoor, you write about how they are making that trip through the jungle that takes many days and
[Amit Varma]: you write and you quote her as saying, quote, lots of people abandoned their children in the jungle.
[Amit Varma]: So many small children could not walk. And so they walked ahead and left them behind.
[Amit Varma]: So many families even buried their children in the forest itself. Stop good. And this is
[Amit Varma]: buried alive. And you pointed out about how when she is given birth and the sword is used to cut
[Amit Varma]: her umbilical cord, even they leave the child there and they walk a few steps before they hear
[Amit Varma]: the cry and other instincts kick in. And this is that sort of treating a human life as if it is
[Amit Varma]: suddenly in those extraordinary times, a life loses its values. And, and, and, you know, people
[Amit Varma]: often think of partition as, you know, like you quoted that other person saying, you know,
[Amit Varma]: whatever, but the point is that we are like this, humans are like this, that this is, you know,
[Amit Varma]: if you look at what happened during the Delhi riots or the Gujarat riots.
[Guest]: I was just going to say that.
[Amit Varma]: And it, I think, you know, reveals a deep truth about human nature, perhaps that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: all of our kindness and compassion is contingent and, you know, and, and into passion whipped by
[Amit Varma]: abstract concepts, we can cause so much concrete harm as it were. Was this, I mean, was some of
[Amit Varma]: this a surprise to you? Did you have to steal yourself to take all of this in and process it?
[Amit Varma]: And then, you know, contextualize it to the modern time. Did you ever ask yourself,
[Amit Varma]: what would I do? You know,
[Guest]: All the time, I, to be able to put yourself in someone's shoes and feel what they are feeling
[Guest]: called empathy. That's what empathy is. And I think that I did that all the time. So when
[Guest]: Lieutenant General Sharma was talking about how it felt to leave that baby there. Of course,
[Guest]: I was thinking about how it felt. Of course, I asked him how it felt. And you can only assume
[Guest]: what his answer was because he was a, he was a real military man. And yet these things
[Guest]: tore him up from inside. Right. Which tells us that there are contradictions within the
[Guest]: most disciplined of people, which can tell us that there must be contradictions within the
[Guest]: most nationalist of people. But of course, like you question everything. You don't think that
[Guest]: when the Delhi riots happened, the first thing I thought of is partition. Of course, I don't know,
[Guest]: like, I am, you can still feel the tremors of partition today and not physically only within,
[Guest]: you know, places like Kashmir or the Northeast. You can feel it every day. You can feel it every
[Guest]: day if you're looking out for it. And it is in the way that people have changed after partition
[Guest]: in the creation of the other, in the way in which we treat human lives as worthless.
[Guest]: Mob mentality is the same now as it was then. It is very difficult to extricate reason from that.
[Guest]: It's just that now we should have had more onus and we should have had more responsibility to
[Guest]: think the other way. But we haven't. We haven't. And anyone, anyone who cannot see the comparison
[Guest]: is not looking for it or trying very hard not to deny it. So one of the projects that I have
[Guest]: been doing for many years on the side is to look at generational memory and to look at the ways
[Guest]: in which people have been shaped by partition and how or what we feel. Because I think that
[Guest]: a lot of people think partition memory ends at the first generation, but that's obviously not
[Guest]: the case. And maybe a theory that I have, I don't know if it's like a, it's a form in a theory or
[Guest]: not, but maybe people who have not felt the pain of partition are the ones that instigate violence
[Guest]: towards the other. Because never have I seen or heard in the generation that witnessed partition
[Guest]: or even 84 riots for that matter. I don't know any malicious words for the other side. You hear
[Guest]: stories in Delhi riots of Sikhs that were hunted in 1984 and they are the ones who saved Muslims.
[Guest]: What does it tell you? It tells you that people who witness violence do have the ability to look
[Guest]: past it because they have witnessed something. They don't want someone else to witness the same
[Guest]: thing. I don't know. This is just me thinking out loud. I don't know whether this is the case. I
[Guest]: haven't done enough research to know whether this is the case, but I'd like to think so.
[Guest]: I don't know. I don't even know where I'm going with this part actually, just to understand
[Guest]: whether or not we can draw connections to the present and why it was so important for me to
[Guest]: put myself in this book because the world around us has never been more uncertain in so many
[Guest]: different ways. And I think that there are a lot of panels to be made with partition
[Amit Varma]: and the birth of difference. So I have a related sort of big question relating to this, but
[Amit Varma]: before that, just an observation on what you said that, you know, what you just said about
[Amit Varma]: people who have experienced violence, maybe more wary of, you know, going down that route again.
[Amit Varma]: I'm not sure I agree. And I would also say that perhaps there is a little bit of selection bias
[Amit Varma]: there because one of the things that I noted through your book is that everyone you spoke to
[Amit Varma]: was relatively very privileged and came out of it good. You know, they are the ones
[Amit Varma]: who managed to build a life, who survived, who managed to build a life and who can therefore
[Amit Varma]: have the luxury of forgiveness as it were, and, you know, can sort of suppress that their
[Amit Varma]: bitterness, who can leave the bitterness behind. And I'm sure that's a thought that must have
[Guest]: struck you also. Of course, the fact that you're looking at objects already means that you're
[Guest]: looking at people who could have carried objects, right? And I would be the first one to admit
[Guest]: all sorts of gaps in my own research. I mean, it's with people, you know, there's only so much,
[Guest]: so many criterias you can take with people, right? So yeah, of course, there are many limitations.
[Amit Varma]: That is one of them. Perfect. Going back to, you know, what you just said about these times are
[Amit Varma]: more challenging than others. And they're more challenging in one more aspect, which you've sort
[Amit Varma]: of hinted at in your book, though I don't know if you consciously thought of it that way. And that
[Amit Varma]: is the aspect of how people relate to each other. For example, in your book, you've quoted Kizarji,
[Amit Varma]: one of the subjects of your chapters, saying, quote, in the old days, people used to care for
[Amit Varma]: one another, ek doosre ki hamdardiya karte the, but now they only think of themselves. The
[Amit Varma]: relationships between people have diminished between communities too, and especially between
[Amit Varma]: our two countries. Taluk, Urdu ka lafza taluk, in English, you call it relation, aur Punjabi
[Amit Varma]: vich enu kehnde hai jor jamna. Stop. My broad question for you, which also feeds into this
[Amit Varma]: is that one in modern times, because life is faster and more fragmented, has community become
[Amit Varma]: less important. And when you speak about today's times being more challenging than before,
[Amit Varma]: I agree with that, but not just in a sense of what is happening around us in terms of politics,
[Amit Varma]: because we have seen, you know, much of the 20th century, much of the world has, you know, been
[Amit Varma]: through, you know, authoritarian dictatorships where millions have died. So in that sense,
[Amit Varma]: this may not seem that new. But one way in which these modern times are different is that we are
[Amit Varma]: more in this way, abstract ideas, forming these online tribes of people we never meet, doing
[Amit Varma]: things in the virtual world, which we would normally not do in the real world, but who knows
[Amit Varma]: if driven to it by these passions, we could even do them. But also what there is a sense of loss
[Amit Varma]: is a loss of community. Like, for example, I have lived in the housing society where I live for
[Amit Varma]: about seven years. And I don't know any neighbors apart from, you know, one of the neighbors on our
[Amit Varma]: floor, we don't meet our neighbors, we don't hang around, there's no sense of community there. And
[Amit Varma]: therefore, you're not putting real faces to people and having those real interactions. And even if
[Amit Varma]: you did, as you pointed out in the example from Multan of all the villages gathered around the
[Amit Varma]: radio who know each other and are still broken up by that. So do you think that sort of the greater
[Amit Varma]: level of abstraction in our lives where we are interacting with real people doing concrete
[Amit Varma]: things with them less and less is something that increases the dangers of sudden violence? Because
[Amit Varma]: then where is the empathy? Where is the relating? Where is the, you know, looking at your neighbor's
[Amit Varma]: kid and saying, oh, he's got a cold and let me give him something and just feeling that normal
[Amit Varma]: everyday thing. So it's that, you know, I know, it's conservatives who will bemoan the loss of
[Amit Varma]: community. But is that then a real danger? I mean, like, like earlier, you said, for example, that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, millennials don't know how to listen. And, you know, to me, that's also part of what
[Amit Varma]: is happening. And it's not the fault of millennials, or they're inherently worse people than
[Amit Varma]: other generations, older people might feel that way sometimes. But just that, you know, these are
[Amit Varma]: the imperatives of the time where our attention is so fragmented, and we have access to so much
[Amit Varma]: happening in the world. Is that something you've thought about or that strikes any kind of thought?
[Guest]: The loss of community is definitely ever present. But I have not thought of it in the large,
[Guest]: in this very vast way. I think of it in very small ways in terms of the loss of my collective
[Guest]: history. So a small example of that is when you go to weddings, Punjabi weddings, specifically,
[Guest]: there are these aunties sitting with a dholak and a spoon, singing songs. I don't know these songs.
[Guest]: I can't say these songs. I don't speak Punjabi. After these aunties are gone, who's going to sing
[Guest]: these songs? So my worries are not always that large, my worries are smaller, and to my immediate
[Guest]: life. But maybe you're right, maybe you're right, this drifting apart, this loss of community,
[Guest]: this fact that we don't find commonality with neighbors anymore, or not even friends with our
[Guest]: neighbors anymore, you know, maybe it is, maybe it is part of it. Yes, perhaps you're right.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, just kind of thinking aloud and sort of inverting the lament about, you know,
[Amit Varma]: aunties singing Punjabi songs. And I guess why that would feel like a loss is because those
[Amit Varma]: Punjabi songs carry so much else with them rather than the words in the music. But they carry all
[Amit Varma]: of that for the people who are singing them or who remember them. And maybe it is not a loss if a
[Amit Varma]: generation grows up without ever having heard them, they might have their own version, modern
[Amit Varma]: current day versions of that just to think aloud, not to say that it is not a loss. Anything that
[Amit Varma]: is lost is of course a loss. But, you know, so much of what is lost is a loss because of all
[Amit Varma]: these other sort of resonances that they contain. And those resonances are, you know, dependent on
[Amit Varma]: someone feeling the resonance. It's like, you know, the poet Vijay Sheshadri wrote this beautiful
[Amit Varma]: poem, The Mountain at the End of the Universe, where the poem was basically about if there is
[Amit Varma]: a mountain at the end of the universe, and it's the only thing that is there, then how can you
[Amit Varma]: say whether it is a big mountain or a small mountain? I'm sorry, this is a ludicrous digression
[Guest]: it's not a question at all. I mean, it's right, I guess, you know, if there is something else
[Guest]: taking the place within generations of something that's lost, then maybe it makes up for it. For
[Guest]: me, like the Punjabi songs and stuff, lose them. It's just a connection with a certain place that's
[Guest]: being lost in a certain time. And, you know, really, like, it's my responsibility to learn.
[Guest]: But, in some parts, it's also the responsibility of elders to say, you know, so it's a dual
[Guest]: responsibility. But for me, I always feel, I always feel it.
[Amit Varma]: And is in a way, YouTube keeping it alive, because I remember all through my childhood,
[Amit Varma]: and I was born and I spent the first 12 years of my life in Chandigarh before I moved away,
[Amit Varma]: and I'm like half Punjabi, half Bengali. But all through my childhood, I never remember hearing
[Amit Varma]: any tappe. But recently, I've come across tappe on YouTube, they went viral, because it was this
[Amit Varma]: very charming couple which at their wedding were, you know, doing tappe to each other in the whole
[Amit Varma]: Jagjit Singh Chitra Singh style. And, you know, so maybe who knows, these technologies will keep
[Amit Varma]: these long tails of culture alive and help them find new audiences.
[Guest]: I feel like also technology and social media help in, just like now, because we live in a
[Guest]: digital age, they help in breaking a lot of myths about the other side as well. So that's another,
[Guest]: I have depended a lot on social media and technology to get contacts for the other side.
[Guest]: So yeah, definitely. But digital means we can become more connected to the past.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, I used to love TikTok for that reason. I mean, it's, I taught a course called TikTok
[Amit Varma]: in Indian society, I think it's a great tragedy that is lost, because it just empowered so many
[Amit Varma]: people and give them a platform and also, you know, give them the sense that there are other people
[Amit Varma]: like them. And that and therefore give them the confidence to produce content, which other people
[Amit Varma]: would watch. So I think it's, it's fashionable in some circles to mock TikTok. But I just think it
[Amit Varma]: was sort of incredible in that sense. And you can't take that effect for granted, the technology
[Amit Varma]: came about and you had that cultural effect. And you had sort of preference cascades, where
[Amit Varma]: especially I mean, I saw that in the LGBTQI community, where there was so much emboldened
[Amit Varma]: self expression now happening. And, you know, which is that that's that's kind of an up going
[Amit Varma]: that's a great tragedy. I want to shift now to talking about people's conception of spaces,
[Amit Varma]: especially the places that they come from, you know, the small geographies, as it were the
[Amit Varma]: intricate memories of childhood places that they describe, for example, again, I'm quoting from
[Amit Varma]: your book, where you write, Balbir Singh Bir, born in Silanwadi, close to Sargodha, drew a map of
[Amit Varma]: his city from memory in my notebook. It was detailed beyond imagination for a place he had fled 70
[Amit Varma]: years ago, complete with where the neem trees grow, where the grain market was, and where the
[Amit Varma]: boys of the government school set up by the British celebrated the victory of the Allied forces during
[Amit Varma]: World War Two. When I asked him if he wished to go back, he smiled softly. Man toh karta hai,
[Amit Varma]: it is my heart's desire to find a way home. But now I have no strength, neither in my heart nor
[Amit Varma]: in my body. But memory that is a saving grace. And so I close my eyes and I make the journey back.
[Amit Varma]: Every single day I plunge into the heart of my memory, arroz. And, you know, even in other parts
[Amit Varma]: of your book, like you, you ask someone, I think, to describe Jalandhar and they pause for a moment
[Amit Varma]: and said, Oh, I can't describe Jalandhar, but I'll tell you what was around my house, which also
[Amit Varma]: strikes me that, you know, when we are using these sort of general terms like Jalandhar or Ketpeta
[Amit Varma]: or whatever, you know, we are not actually talking about that city in the way any other individual in
[Amit Varma]: the world would. We are talking about our own sort of special experience of it, which is real only
[Amit Varma]: in our memories. Therefore, it's nowhere, it's not even in Pakistan. And that's something I've
[Amit Varma]: also felt when I revisited places from my childhood, like my college auditorium, where I
[Amit Varma]: went a few years back as an adult, and I was like, what the hell happened here? This was such a big
[Amit Varma]: place? Why is it so small and dingy? And is there something very poignant in that, that you know,
[Amit Varma]: that what they remember was never really there? It was, you know, are all the places that we know
[Amit Varma]: really constructed in our memory, in a sense, even if we haven't been through a partition and
[Guest]: actually been the space? Yes, I call it the imagined landscape, a very concrete term for me,
[Guest]: the house of the past will always be more romantic, because it doesn't exist. It doesn't exist.
[Guest]: In this case, with partition, it literally doesn't exist, because you're always you're
[Guest]: holding on to the childhood notion of things, which is always beautiful. It is untouched by
[Guest]: tragedy. It is, as you said, itna bada lagta tha, ab itna chota hai, you know, and, you know,
[Guest]: several people point this out in the book as well. Preet Singh says that when I was in Quetta as a
[Guest]: child, the Gurdwara was huge. But then she reads things and says, maybe it seemed huge to me,
[Guest]: because I was a child. Or so many other people, he went back to their home, Faiz Ravani goes back to
[Guest]: Jalandhar, and he says that I thought that the city was so big, but within five minutes, I was
[Guest]: at my home doorstep, you know. So I think we hold on to things from our childhood in terms of
[Guest]: geographic spaces, and they may be very different when we encounter them again. Maybe that's one of
[Guest]: the reasons why people don't want to go back, right? Balbir Singh Veer, who sadly actually
[Guest]: passed away this year because of COVID, he didn't want to go back because he had no need to go back.
[Guest]: That's also one thing that one has to reckon with, right? That it may be very different.
[Guest]: Faiz Ravani goes back to Jalandhar, and he goes to the graveyard where his father and sister are
[Guest]: buried. And he says, there was an apartment complex there. So I paid my respects to the
[Guest]: apartment complex. You know, the house in the past is always more beautiful, and always in some ways,
[Guest]: full of happiness. Because it doesn't exist anymore. It doesn't exist.
[Amit Varma]: And is the landscape you occupy in the present also an imaginary landscape, to use your term?
[Guest]: That depends on our perspective. What you can touch is tangible. What you can see is real.
[Guest]: But sometimes you have to see things to believe them. And sometimes you have to believe things
[Amit Varma]: to see them. I was in fact struck by another poignant quote, where you've quoted the architect
[Amit Varma]: from Lahore, Noor Qader, writing about his grandparents from Jalandhar. And he sent you
[Amit Varma]: an email about his maternal grandfather, where he said, quote, Jalandhar was his weakness.
[Amit Varma]: Everything was forgiven if you were from there. My nana would even send his car to Jalandhar autos
[Amit Varma]: in his adopted city of Multan. Stop quote, which was quite, tell me now a little bit about, you
[Guest]: know,
[Guest]: Please, please. Now, his daughter wrote to me recently and said,
[Guest]: Yeah, so that's like hardcore, you know, keeping with the tradition.
[Amit Varma]: And abstract Jalandhar as it were, but in a good way.
[Guest]: Yes, absolutely. But you know, it gives people a sense of security. I was speaking to someone
[Guest]: the other day, and they said something very interesting. They said that partition did not
[Guest]: change who you married in many circumstances, because even when you met people after partition,
[Guest]: particularly in Punjabi houses, the first thing you would ask is,
[Guest]: They always sought out people that they knew, or were familiar.
[Amit Varma]: That's so fascinating. Give me a sense now about what kind of items people chose to carry,
[Amit Varma]: like some of it is accidental, like, for example, you've spoken about someone who has to leave at a
[Amit Varma]: moment's notice to Mussoorie, and they imagine that, okay, it's like a brief holiday, and we'll
[Amit Varma]: come back to Quetta or wherever they were, and they just carry a shawl. In your grandfather,
[Amit Varma]: Balraj Bari's case, you've spoken about how their choice was a practical one of carrying utensils,
[Amit Varma]: because they didn't know if they'll get fed, but they knew that they are likely to get rations.
[Amit Varma]: So why not carry utensils to cook them in and then those utensils become such a repository
[Amit Varma]: of history and memory and all of that. So what are the different kinds of objects which you found
[Amit Varma]: people carrying when they were suddenly displaced, as it were?
[Guest]: So what people carry will also tell you how much time they knew they had, or whether they knew
[Guest]: partition was going to happen or not. If someone sent their entire household on the goods train
[Guest]: beforehand, you knew that they had money, and they had power, right? And they would be okay.
[Guest]: People like my grandfather, for example, they did leave at a moment's notice, but they went from
[Guest]: camp to camp to camp, right? And they did not know where they would get to eat from. But my
[Guest]: great grandmother, I don't know how she had the foresight. She took utensils because she had to
[Guest]: cook in something. Now people carried all kinds of things, everything from mundane utensils,
[Guest]: everyday utensils, to valuable things like jewelry, or plates of gold and silver, or cultural
[Guest]: items of cultural significance like hamam dastas, or paan daans and khaas daans.
[Guest]: And then totally bizarre things like a 15 and a half foot crocodile carcass someone carried,
[Guest]: right? I think that's the most extraordinary object I've archived till date. And then also
[Guest]: the means in which they carried it. There have been stories of people putting gold inside laddus
[Guest]: because food wasn't confiscated on the way. Or there have been this beautiful story I recorded
[Guest]: once about a man who put a small Guru Granth Sahib, tiny two by two inch into the folds of his
[Guest]: pagdi, so that no one would take it along the way. I think that objects actually reveal a lot
[Guest]: about people's circumstances.
[Amit Varma]: And I was also struck by how also they reveal customs which also may be lost along with those
[Amit Varma]: objects like you've spoken about, Nargis Khatun's paan daan, for example, which came down to her
[Amit Varma]: and you've written, quote, one was expected to make a beautiful small paan tightly wrapped so
[Amit Varma]: none of the ingredients fell out and then presented the guest would accept the paan, pick it up and
[Amit Varma]: say adab in return, bowing their head politely. So, you know, the paan daan is not just a
[Amit Varma]: utilitarian thing that you make paan in it, but it's also sort of the repository of a certain
[Amit Varma]: cultural value and maybe an age past.
[Guest]: And I think when you're saying, when you're quoting all these things, I can see how people
[Guest]: said things like, mujhe yaad hai unhone adab kaise kaha aur unhone mujhe kaise dikhaya paan
[Guest]: kaise banate, because she made a paan in front of me, you know. It was not the paan that
[Guest]: I was expecting I would get because it was a very like, karwa sa paan tha, usme kuch
[Guest]: meetha nahi tha. But she made this small tight paan because wo hissa tha, unke culture tha.
[Guest]: Aur aurat ko paan banana aana tha. It was something they just had to learn aur chota
[Guest]: hota tha, tight hota tha, thoda chula, you know, kattha. She told me all this. And I
[Guest]: think that there's something quite ritualistic about that as well, right? Or even the lassi
[Guest]: thing for that matter. Ki ghade mein lassi kaise banate hain? Ya hamam daste mein tum
[Guest]: kaise peeste hoon cheezein? It's something very ritualistic and very, it's again a form
[Guest]: of oral tradition, right? Passed down from one generation to another.
[Amit Varma]: And I was struck by another beautiful thing she said, which, you know, where I'll, you
[Amit Varma]: know, quote her from your book, where she says, quote, but the strangest thing was that
[Amit Varma]: we never realized when it happened. Kab ek mulk khatam hua aur doosra shuru, when India
[Amit Varma]: ended and Pakistan began. There were no obvious differences between one land and its
[Amit Varma]: conjoined neighbor. And so I suspect that we gained our new citizenship in a moment
[Amit Varma]: curiously lost on us. Tucked away in the corner of an overcrowded train, we had quietly
[Amit Varma]: become Pakistani. And there's an echo of this also in an interview of yours, where you
[Amit Varma]: say about how you decided to cross the border by foot and go. And while you were checking
[Amit Varma]: your documents, you suddenly realized that, hey, you'd already crossed over the line.
[Guest]: Yeah. And you know, I wanted to savor that moment that like crossing over is such a
[Guest]: reverential almost, it's such a big deal. Like you're walking across Wagah, you know,
[Guest]: and it's just six inches. It's a white line. That's it. And ussi white line ke upar
[Guest]: aapke your papers, your visa, your luggage, everything is checked. And before you realize
[Guest]: that you've crossed it. And I looked back and India had been left behind. And I was
[Guest]: almost alarmed because I didn't even realize. It's just like taking any other step.
[Amit Varma]: And another aspect of what she speaks about is this language, Samanisha.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. Tell me a little bit about that because that was so incredibly fascinating. Like just
[Amit Varma]: a few days ago, I recorded an episode with Rajat Ubekar, where he told me about this
[Amit Varma]: language in Nagaland he came across, which is not documented anywhere called Nagamese,
[Amit Varma]: which is, you know, which came about through a combination of Naga and Assamese and later
[Amit Varma]: Bihari influences, and how you have all these different ways of speaking because you have
[Amit Varma]: Indo Aryan, Austro Asiatic and Tibeto Burmese language families kind of colliding in that
[Amit Varma]: space. And equally, you know, we tend to think of these languages as specific things.
[Amit Varma]: But the truth is Urdu and Hindi are both in a manner of speaking, not just constantly evolving,
[Amit Varma]: but very recent. And it's not long back that they were one thing and they were Hindustani.
[Amit Varma]: And there are so many different ways of speaking. And tell me a little bit about Samanishahi.
[Guest]: And, you know, the interview with Narges Khatun was in Lahore. And, you know, she was a very,
[Guest]: I would say that she began as a shy interviewee. And I hadn't planned on interviewing her until
[Guest]: after our dinner. So I went to see the family at the home, we had dinner. And in the middle of the
[Guest]: dinner only, she just kept looking at me. Whereas her family's actually quite cosmopolitan. And yet
[Guest]: the first thing she asked me was, have you ever been to Patiala? It was almost very stern,
[Guest]: you know, and like, if you say no, then I'm judging you. But I said no, because I hadn't
[Guest]: been. And then she was, you know, she was very quiet. And then I said, then why don't you tell
[Guest]: me about your Patiala? Tell me, what do you remember? And that whole night she spoke in
[Guest]: Samanishahi. I only realized it was Samanishahi after we had finished our conversation. And her
[Guest]: granddaughter, Bano, asked me, did you understand that? I said, yeah, of course, I understood if you
[Guest]: were in the room as well, didn't you? She said, I didn't understand it. Not entirely, because I
[Guest]: don't speak Samanishahi. And I said, well, neither do I. And up until right now, I didn't know that
[Guest]: it existed. What is Samanishahi? Samanishahi is a mixture of Hindi and Punjabi. And in that sense,
[Guest]: it is a bit cruder than Urdu. It is a rural Hindi, which is mixed with Punjabi. And that is what she
[Guest]: spoke. In fact, when Bano was growing up, both her nani and her dadi were from Samana. And they
[Guest]: used to speak Samanishahi. And Bano, who had grown up learning Urdu, thought that these two dadi and
[Guest]: nani had made a little language of their own, because they were uneducated. And they didn't
[Guest]: speak pure Urdu. Whereas actually, they were speaking in the language that they came from.
[Guest]: So the fact that I was able to understand what she was saying is because I was a Hindi speaker.
[Guest]: And not all words are different, but some words are certainly quite different.
[Guest]: And I just found it so strange that I am able to understand a woman speaking a completely
[Guest]: different language than I do, solely because I speak one part of it. Whereas it just didn't seem
[Guest]: any different to me. I mean, you would be able to understand it as well. But it was extraordinary.
[Guest]: And I think this is the kind of joy of oral history and field research, because you discover
[Amit Varma]: things like this. What I was also sort of curious to ask about is not just the objects that act as
[Amit Varma]: a catalyst and as a sort of a gateway into the memories. But I noticed that at different parts
[Amit Varma]: of your book, when people are sharing their memories with you, they are also talking about
[Amit Varma]: missing objects. For example, in your wonderful chapter about Sumitra Kapoor, like first, I was
[Amit Varma]: very struck by how she could date parts of her life because she said from the age of five,
[Amit Varma]: because she said that that's when I started learning music and music was a peg for her
[Amit Varma]: memories, which struck me that there is also music in a sense playing the role of these objects do
[Amit Varma]: as a peg for memories. And I think with many of us, I mean, it's a common tendency to associate
[Amit Varma]: particular songs or bits of music with memories. And that was fascinating. But I was also struck
[Amit Varma]: by her sort of longing for her old pedal harmonium in Rawalpindi, that when she and her sister would
[Amit Varma]: go back from school at one corner, they would start racing each other because they wanted to
[Amit Varma]: play that pedal harmonium first, and they had to leave that pedal harmonium behind. And just the
[Amit Varma]: fact that decades can pass and you can remember an old pedal harmonium, which you may not even
[Amit Varma]: recognize if you see it, it'll seem like such a clanky instrument for all you know, but in their
[Amit Varma]: memory, it's so precious. Was there a lot of that happening in the sense that it is not just that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, these objects that they have now are an entry into their past lives, but that objects
[Amit Varma]: really have that kind of meaning that we hang memories on them, and we remember them, especially
[Guest]: the further back you go. Why the further back you go even now, right? I call these objects ghost
[Guest]: objects, things that people wish they had carried, things that they left behind, things that they
[Guest]: regret carrying and could switch. Like Maya Mirchandani's grandmother in her chapter, Savitri
[Guest]: Mirchandani, I asked her, if you could carry something, what would it have been? And she said
[Guest]: that there was a big swing for my child and I wish I could have carried that. So I think that the
[Guest]: conventional boundary of the physical object has been surpassed in this book. That's for certain.
[Guest]: Because it's not just about objects that were carried, it's also about objects that were not
[Guest]: carried, objects that were stolen, objects that were missed, reminisced, longed for. And then
[Guest]: there were objects that were deliberately foregoed in some way. There's a story in the introduction
[Guest]: about a woman, a woman has narrated this story to me in Karachi, about a woman called Bua, who
[Guest]: is migrating with her husband from Delhi to Lahore on train. And in the event of their migration,
[Guest]: there is riots on the train and people come and her husband is killed and he's thrown off the
[Guest]: train and he's bleeding. And she, Bua, jumps off after him and she's pregnant. So her husband is
[Guest]: dying and he's basically losing blood and she takes off her entire chadar and she just soaks
[Guest]: his blood in it. And then she leaves him to die there and she travels to Lahore by herself and
[Guest]: she gives birth to her child and she buries the chadar in a grave, as if it were the father.
[Guest]: And so there are objects of really precious nature that are given up for special circumstances.
[Guest]: So I think that, yeah, the physical object is a very loose term in this case. Yes.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. I mean, I found that story incredibly moving and I somehow in a morbid way expected
[Amit Varma]: her to keep the chadar, but, you know, soak with blood. But, you know, the chadar as a proxy for
[Amit Varma]: her, the essence of her husband and therefore burying it and taking her kid every year to the
[Amit Varma]: grave was sort of quite something. And another sort of moving bit was in your chapter about Uma
[Amit Varma]: Sundi Amar, she moves from Lahore to Jalandhar during partition and then she later goes back
[Amit Varma]: to Lahore and she's going to her old neighborhood and she stops somewhere to buy something at a
[Amit Varma]: store. And the person says, you are not from here. Where are you from? And she says, oh,
[Amit Varma]: I've come from Jalandhar. And immediately he says, you know,
[Amit Varma]: Dhanji, tosi mutti bar mitti na leyan de. You know, because he's sort of come from there,
[Amit Varma]: which was also kind of moving. You know, I'll leave it to my listeners to read your wonderful
[Amit Varma]: book and discover much more of it for themselves, which even if they have no connection to
[Amit Varma]: partition, you know, there's a lot in it that is so evocative and moving and thought provoking
[Amit Varma]: itself. Let's kind of get back to you and your process of sort of writing this book. Like,
[Amit Varma]: what was that like in the sense that, you know, I teach an online writing course where people
[Amit Varma]: often ask me about the different sort of writing methods that writers have and how do they find
[Amit Varma]: a voice, what is their discipline, blah, blah, blah. And I have to, at pains, I have to tell
[Amit Varma]: them that, listen, there's no one method for doing it all, except that one thing common
[Amit Varma]: to all writers who have written is that they managed to get their butts down and write
[Amit Varma]: the damn thing. And how they do it, what hacks they use, this can vary. What's your sort
[Amit Varma]: of system like? Like, you already mentioned that you didn't have the book in mind where
[Amit Varma]: you were taking a lot of this material. So obviously, you're not going there with a
[Amit Varma]: preformed narrative, you're going there with an open mind, and you're just trying to draw
[Amit Varma]: what you can and, you know, get as many vivid images as you can. But later, when you sit
[Amit Varma]: about, you know, looking at them, how do you then construct it? What's your discipline?
[Amit Varma]: Like, did the sort of format for the book? Was it there with you from the start? How
[Guest]: do you how did that work?
[Guest]: So I always knew that the format was going to be conversational. It was clear. The minute
[Guest]: I knew that I was going to write something, it was always going to be conversational,
[Guest]: because it just felt most comfortable and most familiar. And most true to the actual
[Guest]: experience of interviewing. I recorded my interviews in various languages. And just
[Guest]: to get, you know, the process going, record the interviews, then I transcribe them and
[Guest]: translate them into English. And then I start writing after doing secondary research specific
[Guest]: to that person. So I should preface by saying that I was incredibly devoted to working on
[Guest]: this, because there was a need to work on this. So in terms of either getting your butt
[Guest]: down or inspiring yourself, there was nothing of that sense, because I had to do it. The
[Guest]: book was born out of a necessity, because there was a void in knowledge. And so in that
[Guest]: sense, I had to do it. And we also decided that the book was to come out at the 70th
[Guest]: anniversary of independence. So there was naturally a deadline for it. The actual process
[Guest]: of writing was, honestly, I had it already in my conversations. So I think that as field
[Guest]: researchers, we are able to rely a lot on our conversations with people and they make
[Guest]: up the bulk of our, our chapters. And I think because I had so much detail from people,
[Guest]: so much sort of extraneous detail about all kinds of stuff, I was able to build that landscape
[Guest]: as well. Not to mention the fact that I did a ton of secondary research about the areas
[Guest]: that they specifically mentioned. I find it very daunting to think of a book. I find it
[Guest]: really, really daunting to think of like a full book. So I always find it a lot easier
[Guest]: to think of chapter by chapter by chapter. Because if you think in bite size, sort of
[Guest]: graspable segments, then you won't get overwhelmed. And I hate, I hate to get overwhelmed. Like
[Guest]: I'm a very, very meticulous person, I would say. So I took it chapter by chapter by chapter.
[Guest]: And for the duration that I was working on any particular chapter, everything else didn't
[Guest]: exist for me. Which is why you can have coinciding elements like child in Ajit Kaur's chapter
[Guest]: to the child in Lieutenant General Sharma's chapter, and they don't have a connection.
[Guest]: But they, if they have a connection, it's quite contradictory to one another.
[Guest]: I think that writing comes easily to me. Like I don't want to lie about this. And I don't want to
[Guest]: make up something when it's not true. Writing comes easily to me.
[Guest]: The feeling also came pretty easily to me. I am a diligent note taker, which is something that if,
[Guest]: if there are writers listening in on this conversation about, especially field researchers,
[Guest]: make this a habit. When you are talking to people in the field, you have an audio recorder or video
[Guest]: recorder on, but make it a point to take your own notes as well. And this could be maybe something
[Guest]: they're saying resonates with you more. You know, it's going to be there in your recording, but you
[Guest]: want to write it down because that is kind of the essence of their conversation. Or what I did was
[Guest]: made a note of gestures, made a note of the light, made a note of the way they spoke, made a note of
[Guest]: whether their language changed from one thing to another. For example, when my grandparents spoke
[Guest]: to one another, it was always in Punjabi. But when my grandfather spoke to me, it was always in
[Guest]: English. This is a conscious choice that he made. And it was up to me to discuss and understand
[Guest]: why that was. So things like that. And you will find that your handwritten notes will not only
[Guest]: make the story stay with you longer, but also help you to remember key aspects of that interview.
[Guest]: Because if you're like me and you're doing say like hundreds of interviews in a span of six or
[Guest]: seven months, you may not remember everything. So if you refer back to your notes, it will become
[Guest]: a lot clearer. So that was that. But I think that the actual writing process, putting things
[Amit Varma]: together, it was not hard. It was not hard. And where are you in regard to like, do you do
[Amit Varma]: multiple drafts? Or are you just very meticulous with the first draft, revising every sentence and
[Amit Varma]: paragraph as you go along? How does that work? Okay, so basically, your first draft has already
[Guest]: been edited 40 times while it was being written in a sense. Yeah. And I think that I made a really
[Guest]: good working system with my editor, every time I would finish a chapter, I'd send it to him.
[Guest]: And that way, we made our deadline a lot easier as well, because it wasn't a big chunk like this
[Guest]: is a 500 and something page book, right? It wasn't that that he was getting at the end, it was just
[Guest]: like chapter by chapter by chapter, which actually just made it a lot easier for both of us. But
[Guest]: I have certain things like, I know that a lot of people think, okay, I just want to get all this
[Guest]: down. And then we'll start working on it. Like we just nuance it. I can't do that. What I do is I
[Guest]: will make really detailed points about my entire chapter. So I want to talk about this, this, this,
[Guest]: this. And then I follow that I follow that very meticulously, which means that yes, I may make 40
[Guest]: divisions within the same chapter. But my first draft, so to say, will be something I can send
[Guest]: to my editor and say, here you go. Now you can work on it. And given that it's your first book,
[Amit Varma]: I guess, the journey through writing it is also a journey of learning how to write in a sense.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, when you end the book, and I presume the introduction was the last thing you wrote in
[Amit Varma]: it. Epilogue was the last thing I wrote. The epilogue. Okay. When was the introduction
[Guest]: written? I'm curious. It was written after all the chapters. Yeah. After all the chapters. Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, and I really loved the introduction. I love the chapters also,
[Amit Varma]: of course, but I thought the introduction was fabulous. It just brought everything together
[Amit Varma]: very well. So when you finish the book, and you look back on the writing that you've done,
[Amit Varma]: say for the first chapter that you wrote in the book or whatever. Yeah, I thought it was horrible.
[Guest]: So did you rewrite it? Or did you just say no? Um, I mean, I just thought that the quality was
[Guest]: really different. Because I told you, right, I was sending chapters to my editor as I was going along.
[Guest]: And I think even he saw that, as I went towards the later chapters, things became a lot
[Guest]: more exciting and a lot more crisper. And you really found the like,
[Guest]: Roland Barthes calls it the punctum of the image, right? So you found that that part of something.
[Guest]: Yeah, I did a bit of revision in the first couple of chapters, definitely.
[Guest]: There was no other way, because then it wouldn't have been of the same quality.
[Amit Varma]: And what are you working on now? I mean, the book was came out?
[Guest]: Yes, so the Remnants came out in 2017 in India, it came out in 2019 in the rest of the world.
[Guest]: Since then, I have been working on a novel. In fact, that I finished in March this year.
[Unknown]: Wow.
[Guest]: Yeah, but it took me three years. And since then, I have been working since March,
[Guest]: I have been working on a book on generational memory of partition. So putting together a lot
[Guest]: of the interviews I've taken over the last three or four years with second or third generations
[Guest]: of families who had witnessed partition, get a sense of what we have inherited from the event.
[Guest]: And again, I think I embarked on this book, because I was looking for some answers as to how
[Guest]: as to how younger people feel about partition, have they inherited pain, have they inherited
[Guest]: curiosity? Is it loss? Is it anger? Is it just longing for a place that you may never see?
[Guest]: And I think what I have through a lot of my conversations is just many more questions,
[Guest]: many more questions, very nuanced questions on identity, on belonging, on religion,
[Guest]: on the duality of people, and the possible versions that exist within the same person.
[Guest]: And yes, of course, a lot of lingering pain in a lot of people. So that's, that's what I'm
[Guest]: writing these days, because all the history on generational memory, having interviewed Indians,
[Guest]: Pakistanis, Bangladeshis, and people from the diaspora.
[Amit Varma]: I love reading this book, and I look forward to reading more of your work. And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I agree with you that I think this is really important work. For my listeners, I must tell
[Amit Varma]: them it is not important in the sense of this, it's important for you to read this, but it's
[Amit Varma]: boring, but it's important. But no, I love reading it. I was very moved by it. And I think it's a
[Amit Varma]: book that everyone should read. And I look forward to your novel as well. Thank you so much for
[Amit Varma]: coming on the show. I'll have to process all the things you said about conversation and learn to
[Guest]: apply some of them myself. You know, I think that this was a very nuanced conversation in itself.
[Guest]: And I mentioned earlier to you, I hadn't spoken about remnants in a long time, which means that
[Guest]: some of the things that I am also saying are in retrospect, thinking about,
[Guest]: because you know, I think that this kind of work, you grow up really fast, whether you like it or
[Guest]: not. And I'm 30 years old now. And I feel like I'm 100. Because I just have to process so many
[Guest]: other people's traumas, really. And you just there's a heaviness, you know, but when you
[Guest]: think back on what you have achieved by doing this, it really feels like it has given, and I
[Guest]: know that I'm saying this about my own book. So it's a bit like, I don't know, I guess it's a bit
[Guest]: like, not a good practice. I don't know. But I know that it has encouraged more people to ask
[Guest]: questions in their family. And that means that an organic archive of partition memory is beginning
[Guest]: to be formed. And one of the things about partition is that because we don't talk about it,
[Guest]: there is no archive of memory that remains. And when we compare it to events like the Holocaust,
[Guest]: which is often done because of the sheer numbers, we see that Holocaust survivors have really
[Guest]: shared stories. And now partition was way more complicated, of course, in the sense that there
[Guest]: was no one person to take blame for what happened, because everyone was to blame at one point.
[Guest]: But I think that we have not shared our stories, which means that in some way, our stories still
[Guest]: don't belong to us, we need to voice them. And I know that Rembrandts has changed a bit of that.
[Guest]: And it has moved things in the right direction. And of course, not just me,
[Guest]: writers like Kavita Puri, and Anam Zakaria, and Urvashi Pitalia, and Ritu Menon
[Guest]: also do similar things. And it is their efforts, as well as mine, that are steering things in the
[Guest]: right direction. So I think the people who are listening to this podcast, if you have stories
[Guest]: of partition or any hidden history in your family, start to ask questions. It's very...
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and I think that, you know, especially given all the resonances of that in these current times,
[Amit Varma]: I think it's both almost sort of urgent to come to terms with all of that. But equally,
[Amit Varma]: sometimes I get a little negative about it. And I think it's futile, because we learn nothing,
[Amit Varma]: we have never learned anything from our past. But regardless of that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: more power to you and those like you. And thanks again for coming on the show.
[Guest]: Thank you. It's my pleasure.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode of The Scene and The Unseen,
[Amit Varma]: hop on over to your nearest bookstore, online or offline, and pick up Anshul Malhotra's excellent
[Amit Varma]: book, Remnants of a Separation. You can follow her on Twitter at Anshul Malhotra. You can follow me
[Amit Varma]: at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-B-A-R-M-A. You can browse past episodes of The Scene and The Unseen
[Amit Varma]: at sceneunseen.in. Thank you for listening.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.